i.dr. dillon to edward delaney, esq., at the pines. near rye, n.h.august 8, 1872.my dear sir: i am happy to assure you that your anxiety is without reason. flemming will be confined to the sofa for three or four weeks, and will have to be careful at first how he uses his leg. a fracture of this kind is always a tedious affair. fortunately the bone was very skilfully set by the surgeon who chanced to be in the drugstore where flemming was brought after his fall, and i apprehend no permanent inconvenience from the accident. flemming is doing perfectly well physically; but i must confess that the irritable and morbid state of mind into which he has fallen causes me a great deal of uneasiness. he is the last man in the world who ought to break his leg. you know how impetuous our friend is ordinarily, what a soul of restlessness and energy, never content unless he is rushing at some object, like a sportive bull at a red shawl; but amiable withal. he is no longer amiable. his temper has become something frightful. miss fanny flemming came up from newport, where the family are staying for the summer, to nurse him; but he packed her off the next morning in tears. he has a complete set of balzac's works, twenty-seven volumes, piled up near his sofa, to throw at watkins whenever that exemplary serving-man appears with his meals. yesterday i very innocently brought flemming a small basket of lemons. you know it was a strip of lemonpeel on the curbstone that caused our friend's mischance. well, he no sooner set is eyes upon those lemons than he fell into such a rage as i cannot adequately describe. this is only one of moods, and the least distressing. at other times he sits with bowed head regarding his splintered limb, silent, sullen, despairing. when this fit is on him--and it sometimes lasts all day--nothing can distract his melancholy. he refuses to eat, does not even read the newspapers; books, except as projectiles for watkins, have no charms for him. his state is truly pitiable.now, if he were a poor man, with a family depending on his daily labor, this irritability and despondency would be natural enough. but in a young fellow of twenty-four, with plenty of money and seemingly not a care in the world, the thing is monstrous. if he continues to give way to his vagaries in this manner, he will end by bringing on an inflammation of the fibula. it was the fibula he broke. i am at my wits' end to know what to prescribe for him. i have anaesthetics and lotions, to make people sleep and to soothe pain; but i've no medicine that will make a man have a little common-sense. that is beyond my skill, but maybe it is not beyond yours. you are flemming's intimate friend, his fidus achates. write to him, write to him frequently, distract his mind, cheer him up, and prevent him from becoming a confirmed case of melancholia. perhaps he has some important plans disarranged by his present confinement. if he has you will know, and will know how to advise him judiciously. i trust your father finds the change beneficial? i am, my dear sir, with great respect, etc.ii.edward delaney to john flemming, west 38th street, new york.august 9, 1872.my dear jack: i had a line from dillon this morning, and was rejoiced to learn that your hurt is not so bad as reported. like a certain personage, you are not so black and blue as you are painted. dillon will put you on your pins again in two to three weeks, if you will only have patience and follow his counsels. did you get my note of last wednesday? i was greatly troubled when i heard of the accident.i can imagine how tranquil and saintly you are with your leg in a trough! it is deuced awkward, to be sure, just as we had promised ourselves a glorious month together at the sea-side; but we must make the best of it. it is unfortunate, too, that my father's health renders it impossible for me to leave him. i think he has much improved; the sea air is his native element; but he still needs my arm to lean upon in his walks, and requires some one more careful that a servant to look after him. i cannot come to you, dear jack, but i have hours of unemployed time on hand, and i will write you a whole post-office full of letters, if that will divert you. heaven knows, i haven't anything to write about. it isn't as if we were living at one of the beach houses; then i could do you some character studies, and fill your imagination with groups of sea-goddesses, with their (or somebody else's) raven and blonde manes hanging down their shoulders. you should have aphrodite in morning wrapper, in evening costume, and in her prettiest bathing suit. but we are far from all that here. we have rooms in a farm-house, on a cross-road, two miles from the hotels, and lead the quietest of lives.i wish i were a novelist. this old house, with its sanded floors and high wainscots, and its narrow windows looking out upon a cluster of pines that turn themselves into aeolian harps every time the wind blows, would be the place in which to write a summer romance. it should be a story with the odors of the forest and the breath of the sea in it. it should be a novel like one of that russian fellow's--what's his name?--tourguenieff, turguenef, turgenif, toorguniff, turgenjew--nobody knows how to spell him. yet i wonder if even a liza or an alexandra paulovna could stir the heart of a man who has constant twinges in his leg. i wonder if one of our own yankee girls of the best type, haughty and spirituelle, would be of any comfort to you in your present deplorable condition. if i thought so, i would hasten down to the surf house and catch one for you; or, better still, i would find you one over the way.picture to yourself a large white house just across the road, nearly opposite our cottage. it is not a house, but a mansion, built, perhaps, in the colonial period, with rambling extensions, and gambrel roof, and a wide piazza on three sides--a self- possessed, high-bred piece of architecture, with its nose in the air. it stands back from the road, and has an obsequious retinue of fringed elms and oaks and weeping willows. sometimes in the morning, and oftener in the afternoon, when the sun has withdrawn from that part of the mansions, a young woman appears on the piazza with some mysterious penelope web of embroidery in her hand, or a book. there is a hammock over there--of pineapple fibre, it looks from here. a hammock is very becoming when one is eighteen, and has golden hair, and dark eyes, and an emerald-colored illusion dress looped up after the fashion of a dresden china shepherdess, and is chaussee like a belle of the time of louis quatorze. all this splendor goes into that hammock, and sways there like a pond-lily in the golden afternoon. the window of my bedroom looks down on that piazza--and so do i.but enough of the nonsense, which ill becomes a sedate young attorney taking his vacation with an invalid father. drop me a line, dear jack, and tell me how you really are. state your case. write me a long, quite letter. if you are violent or abusive, i'll take the law to you.iii.john flemming to edward delaney.august 11, 1872.your letter, dear ned, was a godsend. fancy what a fix i am in--i, who never had a day's sickness since i was born. my left leg weighs three tons. it is embalmed in spices and smothered in layers of fine linen, like a mummy. i can't move. i haven't moved for five thousand years. i'm of the time of pharaoh.i lie from morning till night on a lounge, staring into the hot street. everybody is out of town enjoying himself. the brown-stone- front houses across the street resemble a row of particularly ugly coffins set up on end. a green mould is settling on the names of the deceased, carved on the silver door-plates. sardonic spiders have sewed up the key-holes. all is silence and dust and desolation. --i interrupt this a moment, to take a shy at watkins with the second volume of cesar birotteau. missed him! i think i could bring him down with a copy of sainte-beuve or the dictionnaire universel, if i had it. these small balzac books somehow do not quite fit my hand; but i shall fetch him yet. i've an idea that watkins is tapping the old gentleman's chateau yquem. duplicate key of the wine-cellar. hibernian swarries in the front basement. young cheops up stairs, snug in his cerements. watkins glides into my chamber, with that colorless, hypocritical face of his drawn out long like an accordion; but i know he grins all the way down stairs, and is glad i have broken my leg. was not my evil star in the very zenith when i ran up to town to attend that dinner at delmonico's? i didn't come up altogether for that. it was partly to buy frank livingstone's roan mare margot. and now i shall not be able to sit in the saddle these two months. i'll send the mare down to you at the pines--is that the name of the place?old dillon fancies that i have something on my mind. he drives me wild with lemons. lemons for a mind diseased! nonsense. i am only as restless as the devil under this confinement--a thing i'm not used to. take a man who has never had so much as a headache or a toothache in his life, strap one of his legs in a section of water- spout, keep him in a room in the city for weeks, with the hot weather turned on, and then expect him to smile and purr and be happy! it is preposterous. i can't be cheerful or calm.your letter is the first consoling thing i have had since my disaster, ten days ago. it really cheered me up for half an hour. send me a screed, ned, as often as you can, if you love me. anything will do. write me more about that little girl in the hammock. that was very pretty, all that about the dresden china shepherdess and the pond-lily; the imagery a little mixed, perhaps, but very pretty. i didn't suppose you had so much sentimental furniture in your upper story. it shows how one may be familiar for years with the reception-room of his neighbor, and never suspect what is directly under his mansard. i supposed your loft stuffed with dry legal parchments, mortgages, and affidavits; you take down a package of manuscript, and lo! there are lyrics and sonnets and canzonettas. you really have a graphic descriptive touch, edward delaney, and i suspect you of anonymous love-tales in the magazines.i shall be a bear until i hear from you again. tell me all about your pretty inconnue across the road. what is her name? who is she? who's her father? where's her mother? who's her lover? you cannot imagine how this will occupy me. the more trifling, the better. my imprisonment has weakened me intellectually to such a degree that i find your epistolary gifts quite considerable. i am passing into my second childhood. in a week or two i shall take to india rubber rings and prongs of coral. a silver cup, with an appropriate inscription, would be a delicate attention on your part. in the mean time, write!iv.edward delaney to john flemming.august 12, 1872.the sick pasha shall be amused. bismillah! he wills it so. if the story-teller becomes prolix and tedious--the bow-string and the sack, and two nubians to drop him into the piscataqua! but truly, jack, i have a hard task. there is literally nothing here--except the little girl over the way. she is swinging in the hammock at this moment. it is to me compensation for many of the ills of life to see her now and then put out a small kid boot, which fits like a glove, and set herself going. who is she, and what is her name? her name is daw. only daughter if mr. richard w. daw, ex-colonel and banker. mother dead. one brother at harvard, elder brother killed at the battle of fair oaks, ten years ago. old, rich family, the daws. this is the homestead, where father and daughter pass eight months of the twelve; the rest of the year in baltimore and washington. the new england winter too many for the old gentleman. the daughter is called marjorie--marjorie daw. sounds odd at first, doesn't it? but after you say it over to yourself half a dozen times, you like it. there's a pleasing quaintness to it, something prim and violet-like. must be a nice sort of girl to be called marjorie daw.i had mine host of the pines in the witness-box last night, and drew the foregoing testimony from him. he has charge of mr. daw's vegetable-garden, and has known the family these thirty years. of course i shall make the acquaintance of my neighbors before many days. it will be next to impossible for me not to meet mr. daw or miss daw in some of my walks. the young lady has a favorite path to the sea-beach. i shall intercept her some morning, and touch my hat to her. then the princess will bend her fair head to me with courteous surprise not unmixed with haughtiness. will snub me, in fact. all this for thy sake, o pasha of the snapt axle-tree!. . . how oddly things fall out! ten minutes ago i was called down to the parlor--you know the kind of parlors in farm-houses on the coast, a sort of amphibious parlor, with sea-shells on the mantel-piece and spruce branches in the chimney-place--where i found my father and mr. daw doing the antique polite to each other. he had come to pay his respects to his new neighbors. mr. daw is a tall, slim gentleman of about fifty-five, with a florid face and snow-white mustache and side-whiskers. looks like mr. dombey, or as mr. dombey would have looked if he had served a few years in the british army. mr. daw was a colonel in the late war, commanding the regiment in which his son was a lieutenant. plucky old boy, backbone of new hampshire granite. before taking his leave, the colonel delivered himself of an invitation as if he were issuing a general order. miss daw has a few friends coming, at 4 p.m., to play croquet on the lawn (parade-ground) and have tea (cold rations) on the piazza. will we honor them with our company? (or be sent to the guard- house.) my father declines on the plea of ill-health. my father's son bows with as much suavity as he knows, and accepts.in my next i shall have something to tell you. i shall have seen the little beauty face to face. i have a presentiment, jack, that this daw is a rara avis! keep up your spirits, my boy, until i write you another letter--and send me along word how's your leg.v.edward delaney to john flemming.august 13, 1872.the party, my dear jack, was as dreary as possible. a lieutenant of the navy, the rector of the episcopal church at stillwater, and a society swell from nahant. the lieutenant looked as if he had swallowed a couple of his buttons, and found the bullion rather indigestible; the rector was a pensive youth, of the daffydowndilly sort; and the swell from nahant was a very weak tidal wave indeed. the women were much better, as they always are; the two miss kingsburys of philadelphia, staying at the seashell house, two bright and engaging girls. but marjorie daw!the company broke up soon after tea, and i remained to smoke a cigar with the colonel on the piazza. it was like seeing a picture, to see miss marjorie hovering around the old soldier, and doing a hundred gracious little things for him. she brought the cigars and lighted the tapers with her own delicate fingers, in the most enchanting fashion. as we sat there, she came and went in the summer twilight, and seemed, with her white dress and pale gold hair, like some lovely phantom that had sprung into existence out of the smokewreaths. if she had melted into air, like the statue of galatea in the play, i should have been more sorry than surprised.it was easy to perceive that the old colonel worshipped her and she him. i think the relation between an elderly father and a daughter just blooming into womanhood the most beautiful possible. there is in it a subtile sentiment that cannot exist in the case of mother and daughter, or that of son and mother. but this is getting into deep water.i sat with the daws until half past ten, and saw the moon rise on the sea. the ocean, that had stretched motionless and black against the horizon, was changed by magic into a broken field of glittering ice, interspersed with marvellous silvery fjords. in the far distance the isle of shoals loomed up like a group of huge bergs drifting down on us. the polar regions in a june thaw! it was exceedingly fine. what did we talk about? we talked about the weather--and you! the weather has been disagreeable for several days past--and so have you. i glided from one topic to the other very naturally. i told my friends of your accident; how it had frustrated all our summer plans, and what our plans were. i played quite a spirited solo on the fibula. then i described you; or, rather, i didn't. i spoke of your amiability, of your patience under this severe affliction; of your touching gratitude when dillon brings you little presents of fruit; of your tenderness to your sister fanny, whom you would not allow to stay in town to nurse you, and how you heroically sent her back to newport, preferring to remain alone with mary, the cook, and your man watkins, to whom, by the way, you were devotedly attached. if you had been there, jack, you wouldn't have known yourself. i should have excelled as a criminal lawyer, if i had not turned my attention to a different branch of jurisprudence.miss marjorie asked all manner of leading questions concerning you. it did not occur to me then, but it struck me forcibly afterwards, that she evinced a singular interest in the conversation. when i got back to my room, i recalled how eagerly she leaned forward, with her full, snowy throat in strong moonlight, listening to what i said. positively, i think i made her like you!miss daw is a girl whom you would like immensely, i can tell you that. a beauty without affectation, a high and tender nature--if one can read the soul in the face. and the old colonel is a noble character, too.i am glad that the daws are such pleasant people. the pines is an isolated spot, and my resources are few. i fear i should have found life here somewhat monotonous before long, with no other society than that of my excellent sire. it is true, i might have made a target of the defenceless invalid; but i haven't a taste for artillery, moi.vi.john flemming to edward delaney.august 17, 1872.for a man who hasn't a taste for artillery, it occurs to me, my friend, you are keeping up a pretty lively fire on my inner works. but go on. cynicism is a small brass field-piece that eventually bursts and kills the artilleryman.you may abuse me as much as you like, and i'll not complain; for i don't know what i should do without your letters. they are curing me. i haven't hurled anything at watkins since last sunday, partly because i have grown more amiable under your teaching, and partly because watkins captured my ammunition one night, and carried it off to the library. he is rapidly losing the habit he had acquired of dodging whenever i rub my ear, or make any slight motion with my right arm. he is still suggestive of the wine-cellar, however. you may break, you may shatter watkins, if you will, but the scent of the roederer will hang round him still.ned, that miss daw must be a charming person. i should certainly like her. i like her already. when you spoke in your first letter of seeing a young girl swinging in a hammock under your chamber window, i was somehow strangely drawn to her. i cannot account for it in the least. what you have subsequently written of miss daw has strengthened the impression. you seem to be describing a woman i have known in some previous state of existence, or dreamed of in this. upon my word, if you were to send me her photograph, i believe i should recognize her at a glance. her manner, that listening attitude, her traits of character, as you indicate them, the light hair and the dark eyes--they are all familiar things to me. asked a lot of questions, did she? curious about me? that is strange.you would laugh in your sleeve, you wretched old cynic, if you knew how i lie awake nights, with my gas turned down to a star, thinking of the pines and the house across the road. how cool it must be down there! i long for the salt smell in the air. i picture the colonel smoking his cheroot on the piazza. i send you and miss daw off on afternoon rambles along the beach. sometimes i let you stroll with her under the elms in the moonlight, for you are great friends by this time, i take it, and see each other every day. i know your ways and your manners! then i fall into a truculent mood, and would like to destroy somebody. have you noticed anything in the shape of a lover hanging around the colonel lares and penates? does that lieutenant of the horse-marines or that young stillwater parson visit the house much? not that i am pining for news of them, but any gossip of the kind would be in order. i wonder, ned, you don't fall in love with miss daw. i am ripe to do it myself. speaking of photographs, couldn't you manage to slip one of her cartes-de-visite from her album--she must have an album, you know--and send it to me? i will return it before it could be missed. that's a good fellow! did the mare arrive safe and sound? it will be a capital animal this autumn for central park.oh--my leg? i forgot about my leg. it's better.vii.edward delaney to john flemmimg.august 20, 1872.you are correct in your surmises. i am on the most friendly terms with our neighbors. the colonel and my father smoke their afternoon cigar together in our sitting-room or on the piazza opposite, and i pass an hour or two of the day or the evening with the daughter. i am more and more struck by the beauty, modesty, and intelligence of miss daw.you asked me why i do not fall in love with her. i will be frank, jack; i have thought of that. she is young, rich, accomplished, uniting in herself more attractions, mental and personal, than i can recall in any girl of my acquaintance; but she lacks the something that would be necessary to inspire in me that kind of interest. possessing this unknown quality, a woman neither beautiful nor wealthy nor very young could bring me to her feet. but not miss daw. if we were shipwrecked together on an uninhabited island--let me suggest a tropical island, for it costs no more to be picturesque--i would build her a bamboo hut, i would fetch her bread-fruit and cocoanuts, i would fry yams for her, i would lure the ingenuous turtle and make her nourishing soups, but i wouldn't make love to her--not under eighteen months. i would like to have her for a sister, that i might shield her and counsel her, and spend half my income on old threadlace and camel's-hair shawls. (we are off the island now.) if such were not my feeling, there would still be an obstacle to my loving miss daw. a greater misfortune could scarcely befall me than to love her. flemming, i am about to make a revelation that will astonish you. i may be all wrong in my premises and consequently in my conclusions; but you shall judge.that night when i returned to my room after the croquet party at the daw's, and was thinking over the trivial events of the evening, i was suddenly impressed by the air of eager attention with which miss daw had followed my account of your accident. i think i mentioned this to you. well, the next morning, as i went to mail my letter, i overtook miss daw on the road to rye, where the post- office is, and accompanied her thither and back, an hour's walk. the conversation again turned to you, and again i remarked that inexplicable look of interest which had lighted up her face the previous evening. since then, i have seen miss daw perhaps ten times, perhaps oftener, and on each occasion i found that when i was not speaking of you, or your sister, or some person or place associated with you, i was not holding her attention. she would be absent-minded, her eyes would wander away from me to the sea, or to some distant object in the landscape; her fingers would play with the leaves of a book in a way that convinced me she was not listening. at these moments if i abruptly changed the theme--i did it several times as an experiment--and dropped some remark about my friend flemming, then the sombre blue eyes would come back to me instantly.now, is not this the oddest thing in the world? no, not the oddest. the effect which you tell me was produced on you by my casual mention of an unknown girl swinging in a hammock is certainly as strange. you can conjecture how that passage in your letter of friday startled me. is it possible, than, that two people who have never met, and who are hundreds of miles apart, can exert a magnetic influence on each other? i have read of such psychological phenomena, but never credited them. i leave the solution of the problem to you. as for myself, all other things being favorable, it would be impossible for me to fall in love with a woman who listens to me only when i am talking of my friend!i am not aware that any one is paying marked attention to my fair neighbor. the lieutenant of the navy--he is stationed at rivermouth --sometimes drops in of an evening, and sometimes the rector from stillwater; the lieutenant the oftener. he was there last night. i should not be surprised if he had an eye to the heiress; but he is not formidable. mistress daw carries a neat little spear of irony, and the honest lieutenant seems to have a particular facility for impaling himself on the point of it. he is not dangerous, i should say; though i have known a woman to satirize a man for years, and marry him after all. decidedly, the lowly rector is not dangerous; yet, again, who has not seen cloth of frieze victorious in the lists where cloth of gold went down?as to the photograph. there is an exquisite ivory-type of marjorie, in passe-partout, on the drawing room mantel-piece. it would be missed at once if taken. i would do anything reasonable for you, jack; but i've no burning desire to be hauled up before the local justice of the peace, on a charge of petty larceny.p.s.--enclosed is a spray of mignonette, which i advise you to treat tenderly. yes, we talked of you again last night, as usual. it is becoming a little dreary for me.viii.edward delaney to john flemming.august 22, 1872.your letter in reply to my last has occupied my thoughts all the morning. i do not know what to think. do you mean to say that you are seriously half in love with a woman whom you have never seen-- with a shadow, a chimera? for what else can miss daw to be you? i do not understand it at all. i understand neither you nor her. you are a couple of ethereal beings moving in finer air than i can breathe with my commonplace lungs. such delicacy of sentiment is something that i admire without comprehending. i am bewildered. i am of the earth earthy, and i find myself in the incongruous position of having to do with mere souls, with natures so finely tempered that i run some risk of shattering them in my awkwardness. i am as caliban among the spirits!reflecting on your letter, i am not sure that it is wise in me to continue this correspondence. but no, jack; i do wrong to doubt the good sense that forms the basis of your character. you are deeply interested in miss daw; you feel that she is a person whom you may perhaps greatly admire when you know her: at the same time you bear in mind that the chances are ten to five that, when you do come to know her, she will fall far short of your ideal, and you will not care for her in the least. look at it in this sensible light, and i will hold back nothing from you.yesterday afternoon my father and myself rode over to rivermouth with the daws. a heavy rain in the morning had cooled the atmosphere and laid the dust. to rivermouth is a drive of eight miles, along a winding road lined all the way with wild barberry bushes. i never saw anything more brilliant than these bushes, the green of the foliage and the faint blush of the berries intensified by the rain. the colonel drove, with my father in front, miss daw and i on the back seat. i resolved that for the first five miles your name should not pass my lips. i was amused by the artful attempts she made, at the start, to break through my reticence. then a silence fell upon her; and then she became suddenly gay. that keenness which i enjoyed so much when it was exercised on the lieutenant was not so satisfactory directed against myself. miss daw has great sweetness of disposition, but she can be disagreeable. she is like the young lady in the rhyme, with the curl on her forehead,"when she is good,     she is very, very good,     and when she is bad, she is horrid!"i kept to my resolution, however; but on the return home i relented, and talked of your mare! miss daw is going to try a side- saddle on margot some morning. the animal is a trifle too light for my weight. by the bye, i nearly forgot to say that miss daw sat for a picture yesterday to a rivermouth artist. if the negative turns out well, i am to have a copy. so our ends will be accomplished without crime. i wish, though, i could send you the ivorytype in the drawing-room; it is cleverly colored, and would give you an idea of her hair and eyes, which of course the other will not.no, jack, the spray of mignonette did not come from me. a man of twenty-eight doesn't enclose flowers in his letters--to another man. but don't attach too much significance to the circumstance. she gives sprays of mignonette to the rector, sprays to the lieutenant. she has even given a rose from her bosom to your slave. it is her jocund nature to scatter flowers, like spring.if my letters sometimes read disjointedly, you must understand that i never finish one at a sitting, but write at intervals, when the mood is on me.the mood is not on me now.ix.edward delaney to john flemming.august 23, 1872.i have just returned from the strangest interview with marjorie. she has all but confessed to me her interest in you. but with what modesty and dignity! her words elude my pen as i attempt to put them on paper; and, indeed, it was not so much what she said as her manner; and that i cannot reproduce. perhaps it was of a piece with the strangeness of this whole business, that she should tacitly acknowledge to a third party the love she feels for a man she has never beheld! but i have lost, through your aid, the faculty of being surprised. i accept things as people do in dreams. now that i am again in my room, it all appears like an illusion--the black masses of rembrandtish shadow under the trees, the fireflies whirling in pyrrhic dances among the shrubbery, the sea over there, marjorie sitting on the hammock!it is past midnight, and i am too sleepy to write more.thursday morning.my father has suddenly taken it into his head to spend a few days at the shoals. in the meanwhile you will not hear from me. i see marjorie walking in the garden with the colonel. i wish i could speak to her alone, but shall probably not have an opportunity before we leave.x.edward delaney to john flemming.august 28, 1872.you were passing into your second childhood, were you? your intellect was so reduced that my epistolary gifts seemed quite considerable to you, did they? i rise superior to the sarcasm in your favor of the 11th instant, when i notice that five days' silence on my part is sufficient to throw you into the depths of despondency.we returned only this morning from appledore, that enchanted island --at four dollars per day. i find on my desk three letters from you! evidently there is no lingering doubt in your mind as to the pleasure i derive from your correspondence. these letters are undated, but in what i take to be the latest are two passages that require my consideration. you will pardon my candor, dear flemming, but the conviction forces itself upon me that as your leg grows stronger your head becomes weaker. you ask my advice on a certain point. i will give it. in my opinion you could do nothing more unwise that to address a note to miss daw, thanking her for the flower. it would, i am sure, offend her delicacy beyond pardon. she knows you only through me; you are to her an abstraction, a figure in a dream--a dream from which the faintest shock would awaken her. of course, if you enclose a note to me and insist on its delivery, i shall deliver it; but i advise you not to do so.you say you are able, with the aid of a cane, to walk about your chamber, and that you purpose to come to the pines the instant dillon thinks you strong enough to stand the journey. again i advise you not to. do you not see that, every hour you remain away, marjorie's glamour deepens, and your influence over her increases? you will ruin everything by precipitancy. wait until you are entirely recovered; in any case, do not come without giving me warning. i fear the effect of your abrupt advent here--under the circumstances.miss daw was evidently glad to see us back again, and gave me both hands in the frankest way. she stopped at the door a moment this afternoon in the carriage; she had been over to rivermouth for her pictures. unluckily the photographer had spilt some acid on the plate, and she was obliged to give him another sitting. i have an intuition that something is troubling marjorie. she had an abstracted air not usual with her. however, it may be only my fancy. . . . i end this, leaving several things unsaid, to accompany my father on one of those long walks which are now his chief medicine--and mine!xi.edward delany to john flemming.august 29, 1972.i write in great haste to tell you what has taken place here since my letter of last night. i am in the utmost perplexity. only one thing is plain--you must not dream of coming to the pines. marjorie has told her father everything! i saw her for a few minutes, an hour ago, in the garden; and, as near as i could gather from her confused statement, the facts are these: lieutenant bradly--that's the naval officer stationed at rivermouth--has been paying court to miss daw for some time past, but not so much to her liking as to that of the colonel, who it seems is an old fiend of the young gentleman's father. yesterday (i knew she was in some trouble when she drove up to our gate) the colonel spoke to marjorie of bradly --urged his suit, i infer. marjorie expressed her dislike for the lieutenant with characteristic frankness, and finally confessed to her father--well, i really do not know what she confessed. it must have been the vaguest of confessions, and must have sufficiently puzzled the colonel. at any rate, it exasperated him. i suppose i am implicated in the matter, and that the colonel feels bitterly towards me. i do not see why: i have carried no messages between you and miss daw; i have behaved with the greatest discretion. i can find no flaw anywhere in my proceeding. i do not see that anybody has done anything--except the colonel himself.it is probable, nevertheless, that the friendly relations between the two houses will be broken off. "a plague o' both your houses," say you. i will keep you informed, as well as i can, of what occurs over the way. we shall remain here until the second week in september. stay where you are, or, at all events, do not dream of joining me....colonel daw is sitting on the piazza looking rather wicked. i have not seen marjorie since i parted with her in the garden.xii.edward delaney to thomas dillon, m.d., madison square, new york.august 30, 1872.my dear doctor: if you have any influence over flemming, i beg of you to exert it to prevent his coming to this place at present. there are circumstances, which i will explain to you before long, that make it of the first importance that he should not come into this neighborhood. his appearance here, i speak advisedly, would be disastrous to him. in urging him to remain in new york, or to go to some inland resort, you will be doing him and me a real service. of course you will not mention my name in this connection. you know me well enough, my dear doctor, to be assured that, in begging your secret cooperation, i have reasons that will meet your entire approval when they are made plain to you. we shall return to town on the 15th of next month, and my first duty will be to present myself at your hospitable door and satisfy your curiosity, if i have excited it. my father, i am glad to state, has so greatly improved that he can no longer be regarded as an invalid. with great esteem, i am, etc., etc.xiii.edward delaney to john flemming.august 31, 1872.your letter, announcing your mad determination to come here, has just reached me. i beseech you to reflect a moment. the step would be fatal to your interests and hers. you would furnish just cause for irritation to r. w. d.; and, though he loves marjorie devotedly, he is capable of going to any lengths if opposed. you would not like, i am convinced, to be the means of causing him to treat her with severity. that would be the result of your presence at the pines at this juncture. i am annoyed to be obliged to point out these things to you. we are on very delicate ground, jack; the situation is critical, and the slightest mistake in a move would cost us the game. if you consider it worth the winning, be patient. trust a little to my sagacity. wait and see what happens. moreover, i understand from dillon that you are in no condition to take so long a journey. he thinks the air of the coast would be the worst thing possible for you; that you ought to go inland, if anywhere. be advised by me. be advised by dillon.xiv.telegrams.  september 1, 1872.   1. - to edward delaney.   letter received. dillon be hanged. i think i ought to be on the ground.  j. f.   2. - to john flemming.   stay where you are. you would only complicated matters. do not move until you hear from me.  e. d.   3. - to edward delaney.   my being at the pines could be kept secret. i must see her.  j. f.   4. - to john flemming.   do not think of it. it would be useless. r. w. d. has locked m. in her room. you would not be able to effect and interview.  e. d.   5. - to edward delaney.   locked her in her room. good god. that settles the question. i shall leave by the twelve-fifteen express.  j. f.xv.the arrival.on the second day of september, 1872, as the down express, due at 3.40, left the station at hampton, a young man, leaning on the shoulder of a servant, whom he addressed as watkins, stepped from the platform into a hack, and requested to be driven to "the pines." on arriving at the gate of a modest farm-house, a few miles from the station, the young man descended with difficulty from the carriage, and, casting a hasty glance across the road, seemed much impressed by some peculiarity in the landscape. again leaning on the shoulder of the person watkins, he walked to the door of the farm-house and inquired for mr. edward delaney. he was informed by the aged man who answered his knock, that mr. edward delaney had gone to boston the day before, but that mr. jonas delaney was within. this information did not appear satisfactory to the stranger, who inquired if mr. edward delaney had left any message for mr. john flemming. there was a letter for mr. flemming if he were that person. after a brief absence the aged man reappeared with a letter.xvi.edward delaney to john flemming.september 1, 1872.i am horror-stricken at what i have done! when i began this correspondence i had no other purpose than to relieve the tedium of your sick-chamber. dillon told me to cheer you up. i tried to. i thought that you entered into the spirit of the thing. i had no idea, until within a few days, that you were taking matters au grand serieux.what can i say? i am in sackcloth and ashes. i am a pariah, a dog of an outcast. i tried to make a little romance to interest you, something soothing and idyllic, and, by jove! i have done it only too well! my father doesn't know a word of this, so don't jar the old gentleman any more than you can help. i fly from the wrath to come--when you arrive! for oh, dear jack, there isn't any piazza, there isn't any hammock--there isn't any marjorie daw!"the whole show is dreadful," she cried, coming out of the menagerie of m. martin. she had just been looking at that daring speculator "working with his hyena"--to speak in the style of the program."by what means," she continued, "can he have tamed these animals to such a point as to be certain of their affection for----.""what seems to you a problem," said i, interrupting, "is really quite natural.""oh!" she cried, letting an incredulous smile wander over her lips."you think that beasts are wholly without passions?" i asked her. "quite the reverse; we can communicate to them all the vices arising in our own state of civilization."she looked at me with an air of astonishment."nevertheless," i continued, "the first time i saw m. martin, i admit, like you, i did give vent to an exclamation of surprise. i found myself next to an old soldier with the right leg amputated, who had come in with me. his face had struck me. he had one of those intrepid heads, stamped with the seal of warfare, and on which the battles of napoleon are written. besides, he had that frank good-humored expression which always impresses me favorably. he was without doubt one of those troopers who are surprised at nothing, who find matter for laughter in the contortions of a dying comrade, who bury or plunder him quite lightheartedly, who stand intrepidly in the way of bullets; in fact, one of those men who waste no time in deliberation, and would not hesitate to make friends with the devil himself. after looking very attentively at the proprietor of the menagerie getting out of his box, my companion pursed up his lips with an air of mockery and contempt, with that peculiar and expressive twist which superior people assume to show they are not taken in. then when i was expatiating on the courage of m. martin, he smiled, shook his head knowingly, and said, `well known.'"how `well known'? i said. `if you would only explain to me the mystery i should be vastly obliged.'"after a few minutes, during which we made acquaintance, we went to dine at the first restaurateur's whose shop caught our eye. at dessert a bottle of champagne completely refreshed and brightened up the memories of this odd old soldier. he told me his story, and i said he had every reason to exclaim, `well known.'"when she got home, she teased me to that extent and made so many promises that i consented to communicate to her the old soldier's confidences. next day she received the following episode of an epic which one might call "the frenchman in egypt."during the expedition in upper egypt under general desaix, a provençal soldier fell into the hands of the mangrabins, and was taken by these arabs into the deserts beyond the falls of the nile.in order to place a sufficient distance between themselves and the french army, the mangrabins made forced marches, and only rested during the night. they camped round a well overshadowed by palm trees under which they had previously concealed a store of provisions. not surmising that the notion of flight would occur to their prisoner, they contented themselves with binding his hands, and after eating a few dates, and giving provender to their horses, went to sleep.when the brave provençal saw that his enemies were no longer watching him, he made use of his teeth to steal a scimitar, fixed the blade between his knees, and cut the cords which prevented using his hands; in a moment he was free. he at once seized a rifle and dagger, then taking the precaution to provide himself with a sack of dried dates, oats, and powder and shot, and to fasten a scimitar to his waist he leaped onto a horse, and spurred on vigorously in the direction where he thought to find the french army. so impatient was he to see a bivouac again that he pressed on the already-tired courser at such speed that its flanks were lacerated with his spurs, and at last the poor animal died, leaving the frenchman alone in the desert. after walking some time in the sand with all the courage of an escaped convict, the soldier was obliged to stop, as the day had already ended. in spite of the beauty of an oriental sky at night, he felt he had not strength enough to go on. fortunately he had been able to find a small hill, on the summit of which a few palm trees shot up into the air; it was their verdure seen from afar which had brought hope and consolation to his heart. his fatigue was so great that he lay down upon a rock of granite, capriciously cut out like a camp bed; there he fell asleep without taking any precaution to defend himself while he slept. he had made the sacrifice of his life. his last thought was one of regret. he repented having left the  mangrabins, whose nomad life seemed to smile on him now that he was afar from them and without help. he was awakened by the sun, whose pitiless rays fell with all their force on the granite and produced an intolerable heat for he had had the stupidity to place himself inversely to the shadow thrown by the verdant majestic heads of the palm trees. he looked at the solitary trees and shuddered--they reminded him of the graceful shafts crowned with foliage which characterize the saracen columns in the cathedral of arles.but when, after counting the palm trees, he cast his eye around him, the most horrible despair was infused into his soul. before him stretched an ocean without limit. the dark sand of the desert spread farther than sight could reach in every direction, and glittered like steel struck with a bright light. it might have been a sea of looking glass, or lakes melted together in a mirror. a fiery vapor carried up in streaks made a perpetual whirlwind over the quivering land. the sky was lit with an oriental splendor of insupportable purity, leaving naught for the imagination to desire. heaven and earth were on fire.the silence was awful in its wild and terrible majesty. infinity, immensity, closed in upon the soul from every side. not a cloud in the sky, not a breath in the air, not a flaw on the bosom of the sand, ever moving in diminutive waves; the horizon ended as at sea on a clear day, with one line of light, definite as the cut of a sword.the provençal threw his arms around the trunk of one of the palm trees, as though it were the body of a friend, and then in the shelter of the thin straight shadow that the palm cast upon the granite, he wept. then sitting down he remained as he was, contemplating with profound sadness the implacable scene, which was all he had to look upon. he cried aloud, to measure the solitude. his voice, lost in the hollows of the hill, sounded faintly, and aroused no echo--the echo was in his own heart. the provençal was twenty-two years old; he loaded his carbine."there'll be time enough," he said to himself, laying on the ground the weapon which alone could bring him deliverance.looking by turns at the black expanse and the blue expanse, the soldier  dreamed of france--he smelled with delight the gutters of paris--he remembered the towns through which he had passed, the faces of his fellow soldiers, the most minute details of his life. his southern fancy soon showed him the stones of his beloved provence, in the play of the heat which waved over the spread sheet of the desert. fearing the danger of this cruel mirage, he went down the opposite side of the hill to that by which he had come up the day before. the remains of a rug showed that this place of refuge had at one time been inhabited; at a short distance he saw some palm trees full of dates. then the instinct which binds us to life awoke again in his heart. he hoped to live long enough to await the passing of some arabs, or perhaps he might hear the sound of cannon, for at this time bonaparte was traversing egypt.this thought gave him new life. the palm tree seemed to bend with the weight of the ripe fruit. he shook some of it down. when he tasted this unhoped-for manna, he felt sure that the palms had been cultivated by a former inhabitant--the savory, fresh meat of the dates was proof of the care of his predecessor. he passed suddenly from dark despair to an almost insane joy. he went up again to the top of the hill, and spent the rest of the day in cutting down one of the sterile palm trees, which the night before had served him for shelter. a vague memory made him think of the animals of the desert; and in case they might come to drink at the spring, visible from the base of the rocks but lost farther down, he resolved to guard himself from their visits by placing a barrier at the entrance of his hermitage.in spite of his diligence, and the strength which the fear of being devoured asleep gave him, he was unable to cut the palm in pieces, though he succeeded in cutting it down. at eventide the king of the desert fell; the sound of its fall resounded far and wide, like a sign the solitude; the soldier shuddered as though he had heard some voice predicting woe.but like an heir who does not long bewail a deceased parent, he tore off from this beautiful tree the tall broad green leaves which are its poetic adornment, and used them to mend the mat on which he was to sleep.fatigued by the heat and his work, he fell asleep under the red curtains of his wet cave.in the middle of the night his sleep was troubled by an extraordinary noise; he sat up, and the deep silence around him allowed him to distinguish the alternative accents of a respiration whose savage energy could not belong to a human creature.a profound terror, increased still further by the darkness, the silence, and his waking images, froze his heart within him. he almost felt his hair stand on end, when by straining his eyes to their utmost he perceived through the shadows two faint yellow lights. at first he attributed these lights to the reflection of his own pupils, but soon the vivid brilliance of the night aided him gradually to distinguish the objects around him in the cave, and he beheld a huge animal lying but two steps from him. was it a lion, a tiger, or a crocodile?the provençal was not educated enough to know under what species his enemy ought to be classed; but his fright was all the greater, as his ignorance led him to imagine an terrors at once; he endured a cruel torture, noting every variation of the breathing close to him without daring to make the slightest movement. an odor, pungent like that of a fox, but more penetrating, profounder--so to speak--filled the cave, and when the provençal became sensible of this, his terror reached its height, for he could not longer doubt the proximity of a terrible companion, whose royal dwelling served him for shelter.presently the reflection of the moon, descending on the horizon, lit up the den, rendering gradually visible and resplendent the spotted skin of a panther.this lion of egypt slept, curled up like a big dog, the peaceful possessor of a sumptuous niche at the gate of a hotel; its eyes opened for a moment and closed again; its face was turned toward the man. a thousand confused thoughts passed through the frenchman's mind first he thought of killing it with a bullet from his gun, but he saw there was not enough distance between them for him to take proper aim--the shot would miss the mark. and if it were to wake!--the thought made his limbs rigid. he listened to his own heart beating in the midst of' the silence, and cursed the too violent pulsations which the flow of blood brought on, fearing to disturb that sleep which allowed him time to think of some means of escape.twice he placed his hand on his scimitar, intending to cut off the head of his enemy; but the difficulty of cutting stiff, short hair compelled him to abandon this daring project. to miss would be to die for certain, he thought; he preferred the chances of fair fight, and made up his mind to wait till morning; the morning did not leave him long to wait.he could now examine the panther at ease; its muzzle was smeared with blood."she's had a good dinner," he thought, without troubling himself as to whether her feast might have been on human flesh "she won't be hungry when she gets up."it was a female. the fur on her belly and flanks was glistening white; many small marks like velvet formed beautiful bracelets round her feet; her sinuous tail was also white, ending with black rings; the overpart of her dress, yellow like unburnished gold, very lissome and soft, had the characteristic blotches the form of rosettes which distinguish the panther from every other feline species.this tranquil and formidable hostess snored in an attitude as graceful as that of a cat lying on a cushion. her bloodstained paws, nervous and well armed, were stretched out before her face, which rested upon them, and from which radiated her straight, slender whiskers, like threads of silver.if she had been like that in a cage, the provençal would doubtless have admired the grace of the animal, and the vigorous contrasts of vivid color which gave her robe an imperial splendor; but just then his sight was troubled by her sinister appearance.the presence of the panther, even asleep, could not fail to produce the effect which the magnetic eyes of the serpent are said to have on the nightingale.for a moment the courage of the soldier began to fail before this danger, though no doubt it would have risen at the mouth of a cannon charged with shell. nevertheless, a bold thought brought daylight in his soul and sealed up the source of the cold sweat which sprang forth on his brow. like men driven to bay who defy death and offer their body to the smiter, so he, seeing in this merely a tragic episode, resolved to play his part with honor to the last."the day before yesterday the arabs would have killed me perhaps," he said; so considering himself as good as dead already, he waited bravely, with excited curiosity his enemy's awakening.when the sun appeared, the panther suddenly opened her eyes; then she put out her paws with energy, as if to stretch them and get rid of cramp. at last she yawned, showing the formidable apparatus of her teeth and pointed tongue, rough as a file."a regular petite maîtresse," thought the frenchman, seeing her roll herself about so softly and coquettishly. she licked off the blood which stained her paws and muzzle, and scratched her head with reiterated gestures full of prettiness. "all right, make a little toilet," the frenchman said to himself, beginning to recover his gaiety with his courage; "we'll say good morning to each other presently," and he seized the small, short dagger which he had taken from the mangrabins. at this moment the panther turned her head toward the man and looked at him fixedly without moving.the rigidity of her metallic eyes and their insupportable luster made him shudder, especially when the animal walked toward him. but he looked at her caressingly, staring into her eyes in order to magnetize her, and let her come quite close to him; then with a movement both gentle and amorous, as though he were caressing the most beautiful of women, he passed his hand over her whole body, from the head to the tail, scratching the flexible vertebrae which divided the panther's yellow back. the animal waved her tail voluptuously, and her eyes grew gentle; and when for the third time the frenchman accomplished this interesting flattery, she gave forth one of those purrings by which our cats express their pleasure; but this murmur issued from a throat so powerful and so deep that it resounded through the cave like the last vibrations of an organ in a church. the man, understanding the importance of his caresses, redoubled them in such a way as to surprise and stupefy his imperious courtesan. when he felt sure of having extinguished the ferocity of his capricious companion, whose hunger had so fortunately been satisfied the day before, he got up to go out of the cave; the panther let him go out, but when he had reached the summit of the hill she sprang with the lightness of a sparrow hopping from twig to twig, and rubbed herself against his legs, putting up her back after the manner of all the race of cats. then regarding her guest with eyes whose glare had softened a little, she gave vent to that wild cry which naturalists compare to the grating of a saw."she is exacting," said the frenchman, smilingly.he was bold enough to play with her ears; he caressed her belly and scratched her head as hard as he could.when he saw that he was successful, he tickled her skull with the point of his dagger, watching for the right moment to kill her, but the hardness of her bones made him tremble for his success.the sultana of the desert showed herself gracious to her slave; she lifted her head, stretched out her and manifested her delight by - the tranquility of her attitude. it suddenly occurred to the soldier that to kill this savage princess with one blow he must poignard her in the throat.he raised the blade, when the panther, satisfied no doubt, laid herself gracefully at his feet, and cast up at him glances in which, in spite of their natural fierceness, was mingled confusedly a kind of good will. the poor provençal ate his dates, leaning against one of the palm trees, and casting his eyes alternately on the desert in quest of some liberator and on his terrible companion to watch her uncertain clemency.the panther looked at the place where the date stones fell, and every time that he threw one down her eyes expressed an incredible mistrust.she examined the man with an almost commercial prudence. however, this examination was favorable to him, for when he had finished his meager meal she licked his boots with her powerful rough tongue, brushing off with marvelous skill the dust gathered in the creases."ah, but when she's really hungry!" thought the frenchman. in spite of the shudder this thought caused him, the soldier began to measure curiously the proportions of the panther, certainly one of the most splendid specimens of its race. she was three feet high and four feet long without counting her tail; this powerful weapon, rounded like a cudgel, was nearly three feet long. the head, large as that of a lioness, was distinguished by a rare expression of refinement. the cold cruelty of a tiger was dominant, it was true, but there was also a vague resemblance to the face of a sensual woman. indeed, the face of this solitary queen had something of the gaiety of a drunken nero: she had satiated herself with blood, and she wanted to play.the soldier tried if he might walk up and down, and the panther left him free, contenting herself with following him with her eyes, less like a faithful dog than a big angora cat, observing everything and every movement of her master.when he looked around, he saw, by the spring, the remains of his horse; the panther had dragged the carcass all that way; about two thirds of it had been devoured already. the sight reassured him.it was easy to explain the panther's absence, and the respect she had had for him while he slept. the first piece of good luck emboldened him to tempt the future, and he conceived the wild hope of continuing on good terms with the panther during the entire day, neglecting no means of taming her, and remaining her good graces.he returned to her, and had the unspeakable joy of seeing her wag her tail with an almost imperceptible movement at his approach. he sat down then, without fear, by her side, and they began to play together; he took her paws and muzzle, pulled her ears, rolled her over on her back, stroked her warm, delicate flanks. she let him do what ever he liked, and when he began to stroke the hair on her feet she drew her claws in carefully.the man, keeping the dagger in one hand, thought to plunge it into the belly of the too-confiding panther, but he was afraid that he would be immediately strangled in her last conclusive struggle; besides, he felt in his heart a sort of remorse which bid him respect a creature that had done him no harm. he seemed to have found a friend, in a boundless desert; half unconsciously he thought of his first sweetheart, whom he had nicknamed "mignonne" by way of contrast, because she was so atrociously jealous that all the time of their love he was in fear of the knife with which she had always threatened him.this memory of his early days suggested to him the idea of making the young panther answer to this name, now that he began to admire with less terror her swiftness, suppleness, and softness. toward the end of the day he had familiarized himself with his perilous position; he now almost liked the painfulness of it. at last his companion had got into the habit of looking up at him whenever he cried in a falsetto voice, "mignonne."at the setting of the sun mignonne gave, several times running, a profound melancholy cry. "she's been well brought up," said the lighthearted soldier; "she says her prayers." but this mental joke only occurred to him when he noticed what a pacific attitude his companion remained in. "come, ma petite blonde, i'll let you go to bed first," he said to her, counting on the activity of his own legs to run away as quickly as possible, directly she was asleep, and seek another shelter for the night.the soldier waited with impatience the hour of his flight, and when it had arrived he walked vigorously in the direction of the nile; but hardly had he made a quarter of a league in the sand when he heard the panther bounding after him, crying with that sawlike cry more dreadful even than the sound of her leaping."ah!" he said, "then she's taken a fancy to me, she has never met anyone before, and it is really quite flattering to have her first love."that instant the man fell into one, of those movable quicksands so terrible to travelers and from which it is impossible to save oneself. feeling himself caught, he gave a shriek of alarm; the panther seized him with her teeth by the collar, and, springing vigorously backward, drew him as if by magic out of the whirling sand."ah, mignonne!" cried the soldier, caressing her enthusiastically; "we're bound together for life and death but no jokes, mind!" and he retraced his steps.from that time the desert seemed inhabited. it contained a being to whom the man could talk, and whose ferocity was rendered gentle by him, though he could not explain to himself the reason for their strange friendship. great as was the soldier's desire to stay upon guard, he slept.on awakening he could not find mignonne; he mounted the hill, and in the distance saw her springing toward him after the habit of these animals, who cannot run on account of the extreme flexibility of the vertebral column. mignonne arrived, her jaws covered with blood; she received the wonted caress of her companion, showing with much purring how happy it made her. her eyes, full of languor, turned still more gently than the day before toward the provençal who talked to her as one would to a tame animal."ah! mademoiselle, you are a nice girl, aren't you? just look at that! so we like to be made much of, don't we? aren't you ashamed of yourself? so you have been eating some arab or other, have you? that doesn't matter. they're animals just the same as you are; but don't you take to eating frenchmen, or i shan't like you any longer."she played like a dog with its master, letting herself be rolled over, knocked about, and stroked, alternately; sometimes she herself would provoke the soldier, putting up her paw with a soliciting gesture.some days passed in this manner. this companionship permitted the provençal to appreciate the sublime beauty of the desert; now that he had a living thing to think about, alternations of fear and quiet, and plenty to eat, his mind became filled with contrast and his life began to be diversified.solitude revealed to him all her secrets, and enveloped him in her delights. he discovered in the rising and setting of the sun sights unknown to the world. he knew what it was to tremble when he heard over his head the hiss of a bird's wing, so rarely did they pass, or when he saw the clouds, changing and many-colored travelers, melt one into another. he studied in the night time the effect of the moon upon the ocean of sand, where the simoom made waves swift of movement and rapid in their change. he lived the life of the eastern day, marveling at its wonderful pomp; then, after having reveled in the sight of a hurricane over the plain where the whirling sands made red, dry mists and death-bearing clouds, he would welcome the night with joy, for then fell the healthful freshness of the stars, and he listened to imaginary music in the skies. then solitude taught him to unroll the treasures of dreams. he passed whole hours in remembering mere nothings, and comparing his present life with his past.at last he grew passionately fond of the panther; for some sort of affection was a necessity.whether it was that his will powerfully projected had modified the character of his companion, or whether, because she found abundant food in her predatory excursions in the desert, she respected the man's life, he began to fear for it no longer, seeing her so well tamed.he devoted the greater part of his time to sleep, but he was obliged to watch like a spider knits web that the moment of his deliverance might not escape him, if anyone should pass the line marked by the horizon. he had sacrificed his shirt to make a flag with, which he hung at the top of a palm tree, whose foliage he had torn off. taught by necessity, he found the means of keeping it spread out, by fastening it with little sticks; for the wind might not be blowing at the moment when the passing traveler was looking through the desert.it was during the long hours, when he had abandoned hope, that he amused himself with the panther. he had come to learn the different inflections of her voice, the expressions of her eyes; he had studied the capricious patterns of all the rosettes which marked the gold of her robe. mignonne was not even angry when he took hold of the tuft at the end of her tail to count her rings, those graceful ornaments which glittered in the sun like jewelry. it gave him pleasure to contemplate the supple, fine outlines of her form, the whiteness of her belly, the graceful pose of her head. but it was especially when she was playing that he felt most pleasure in looking at her; the agility and youthful lightness of her movements were a continual surprise to him; he wondered at the supple way in which she jumped and climbed, washed herself and arranged her fur, crouched down and prepared to spring. however rapid her spring might be, however slippery the stone she was on, she would always stop short at the word "mignonne."one day, in a bright midday sun, an enormous bird coursed through the air. the man left his panther to look at this new guest; but after waiting a moment the deserted sultana growled deeply."my goodness! i do believe she's jealous," he cried, seeing her eyes become hard again; "the soul of virginie has passed into her body; that's certain."the eagle disappeared into the air, while the soldier admired the curved contour of the panther.but there was such youth and grace in her form! she was beautiful as a woman! the blond fur of her robe mingled well with the delicate tints of faint white which marked her flanks.the profuse light cast down by the sun made this living gold, these russet markings, to burn in a way to give them an indefinable attraction.the man and the panther looked at one another with a look full of meaning; the coquette quivered when she felt her friend stroke her head; her eyes flashed like lightning--then she shut them tightly."she has a soul," he said, looking at the stillness of this queen of the sands, golden like them, white like them, solitary and burning like them.. . ."well," she said, "i have read your plea in favor of beasts; but how did two so well adapted to understand each other end?""ah, well! you see, they ended as all great passions do end--by a misunderstanding. for some reason one suspects the other of treason; they don't come to an explanation through pride, and quarrel and part from sheer obstinacy.""yet sometimes at the best moments a single word or a look is enough--but anyhow go on with your story.""it's horribly difficult, but you will understand, after what the old villain told me over his champagne."he said--`i don't know if i hurt her, but she turned round, as if enraged, and with her sharp teeth caught hold of my leg--gently, i daresay; but i, thinking she would devour me, plunged my dagger into her throat. she rolled over, giving a cry that froze my heart; and i saw her dying, still looking at me without anger. i would have given all the world--my cross even, which i lied not then--to have brought her to life again. it was as though i had murdered a real person; and the soldiers who had seen my flag, and were come to my assistance, found me in tears.'"`well sir,' he said, after a moment of silence, `since then i have been in war in germany, in spain, in russia, in france; i've certainly carried my carcass about a good deal, but never have i seen anything like the desert. ah! yes, it is very beautiful!'" 'what did you feel there?' i asked him."'oh! that can't be described, young man. besides, i am not always regretting my palm trees and my panther. i should have to be very melancholy for that. in the desert, you see, there is everything and nothing.'yes, but explain----'"'well,' he said, with an impatient gesture, 'it is god without mankind.'"many years ago, on my way from hongkong to new york, i passed a week in san francisco.  a long time had gone by since i had been in that city, during which my ventures in the orient had prospered beyond my hope; i was rich and could afford to revisit my own country to renew my friendship with such of the companions of my youth as still lived and remembered me with the old affection.  chief of these, i hoped, was mohun dampier, an old schoolmate with whom i had held a desultory correspondence which had long ceased, as is the way of correspondence between men.  you may have observed that the indisposition to write a merely social letter is in the ratio of the square of the distance between you and your correspondent.  it is a law.i remembered dampier as a handsome, strong young fellow of scholarly tastes, with an aversion to work and a marked indifference to many of the things that the world cares for, including wealth, of which, however, he had inherited enough to put him beyond the reach of want.  in his family, one of the oldest and most aristocratic in the country, it was, i think, a matter of pride that no member of it had ever been in trade nor politics, nor suffered any kind of distinction.  mohan was a trifle sentimental, and had in him a singular element of superstition, which led him to the study of all manner of occult subjects, although his sane mental health safeguarded him against fantastic and perilous faiths.  he made daring incursions into the realm of the unreal without renouncing his residence in the partly surveyed and charted region of what we are pleased to call certitude.the night of my visit to him was stormy.  the californian winter was on, and the incessant rain splashed in the deserted streets, or, lifted by irregular gusts of wind, was hurled against the houses with incredible fury.  with no small difficulty my cabman found the right place, away out toward the ocean beach, in a sparsely populated suburb.  the dwelling, a rather ugly one, apparently, stood in the center of its grounds, which as nearly as i could make out in the gloom were destitute of either flowers or grass.  three or four trees, writhing and moaning in the torment of the tempest, appeared to be trying to escape from their dismal environment and take the chance of finding a better one out at sea.  the house was a two-story brick structure with a tower, a story higher, at one corner.  in a window of that was the only visible light.  something in the appearance of the place made me shudder, a performance that may have been assisted by a rill of rainwater down my back as i scuttled to cover in the doorway.in answer to my note apprising him of my wish to call, dampier had written, 'don't ring - open the door and come up.'  i did so.  the staircase was dimly lighted by a single gas-jet at the top of the second flight.  i managed to reach the landing without disaster and entered by an open door into the lighted square room of the tower.  dampier came forward in gown and slippers to receive me, giving me the greeting that i wished, and if i had held a thought that it might more fitly have been accorded me at the front door the first look at him dispelled any sense of his inhospitality.he was not the same.  hardly past middle age, he had gone gray and had acquired a pronounced stoop.  his figure was thin and angular, his face deeply lined, his complexion dead-white, without a touch of color.  his eyes, unnaturally large, glowed with a fire that was almost uncanny.he seated me, proffered a cigar, and with grave and obvious sincerity assured me of the pleasure that it gave him to meet me.  some unimportant conversation followed, but all the while i was dominated by a melancholy sense of the great change in him.  this he must have perceived, for he suddenly said with a bright enough smile, 'you are disappointed in me - non sum qualis eram.'i hardly knew what to reply, but managed to say:  'why, really, i don't know:  your latin is about the same.'he brightened again.  'no,' he said, 'being a dead language, it grows in appropriateness.  but please have the patience to wait:  where i am going there is perhaps a better tongue.  will you care to have a message in it?'the smile faded as he spoke, and as he concluded he was looking into my eyes with a gravity that distressed me.  yet i would not surrender myself to his mood, nor permit him to see how deeply his prescience of death affected me.'i fancy that it will be long,' i said, 'before human speech will cease to serve our need; and then the need, with its possibilities of service, will have passed.'he made no reply, and i too was silent, for the talk had taken a dispiriting turn, yet i knew not how to give it a more agreeable character.  suddenly, in a pause of the storm, when the dead silence was almost startling by contrast with the previous uproar, i heard a gentle tapping, which appeared to come from the wall behind my chair.  the sound was such as might have been made by a human hand, not as upon a door by one asking admittance, but rather, i thought, as an agreed signal, an assurance of someone's presence in an adjoining room; most of us, i fancy, have had more experience of such communications than we should care to relate.  i glanced at dampier.  if possibly there was something of amusement in the look he did not observe it.  he appeared to have forgotten my presence, and was staring at the wall behind me with an expression in his eyes that i am unable to name, although my memory of it is as vivid to-day as was my sense of it then.  the situation was embarrassing!  i rose to take my leave.  at this he seemed to recover himself.'please be seated,' he said; 'it is nothing - no one is there.'but the tapping was repeated, and with the same gentle, slow insistence as before.'pardon me,' i said, 'it is late.  may i call tomorrow?'he smiled - a little mechanically, i thought.  'it is very delicate of you,' said he, 'but quite needless.  really, this is the only room in the tower, and no one is there.  at least -'  he left the sentence incomplete, rose, and threw up a window, the only opening in the wall from which the sound seemed to come.  'see.'not clearly knowing what else to do i followed him to the window and looked out.  a street-lamp some little distance away gave enough light through the murk of the rain that was again falling in torrents to make it entirely plain that 'no one was there.'  in truth there was nothing but the sheer blank wall of the tower.dampier closed the window and signing me to my seat resumed his own.the incident was not in itself particularly mysterious; any one of a dozen explanations was possible though none has occurred to me, yet it impressed me strangely, the more, perhaps, from my friend's effort to reassure me, which seemed to dignify it with a certain significance and importance.  he had proved that no one was there, but in that fact lay all the interest; and he proffered no explanation.  his silence was irritating and made me resentful.'my good friend,'  i said, somewhat ironically, i fear, 'i am not disposed to question your right to harbor as many spooks as you find agreeable to your taste and consistent with your notions of companionship; that is no business of mine.  but being just a plain man of affairs, mostly of this world, i find spooks needless to my peace and comfort.  i am going to my hotel, where my fellow-guests are still in the flesh.'it was not a very civil speech, but he manifested no feeling about it.  'kindly remain', he said.  'i am grateful for your presence here.  what you have heard to-night i believe myself to have heard twice before.  now i know it was no illusion. that is much to me - more than you know.  have a fresh cigar and a good stock of patience while i tell you the story.'the rain was now falling more steadily, with a low, monotonous susurration, interrupted at long intervals by the sudden slashing of the boughs of the trees as the wind rose and failed.  the night was well advanced, but both sympathy and curiosity held me a willing listener to my friend's monologue, which i did not interrupt by a single word from beginning to end.'ten years ago,' he said, 'i occupied a ground-floor apartment in one of a row of houses, all alike, away at the other end of the town, on what we call rincon hill.  this had been the best quarter of san francisco, but had fallen into neglect and decay, partly because the primitive character of its domestic architecture no longer suited the maturing tastes of our wealthy citizens, partly because certain public improvements had made a wreck of it.  the row of dwellings in one of which i lived stood a little way back from the street, each having a miniature garden, separated from its neighbors by low iron fences and bisected with mathematical precision by a box-bordered gravel walk from gate to door.'one morning as i was leaving my lodging i observed a young girl entering the adjoining garden on the left.  it was a warm day in june, and she was lightly gowned in white.  from her shoulders hung a broad straw hat profusely decorated with flowers and wonderfully beribboned in the fashion of the time.  my attention was not long held by the exquisite simplicity of her costume, for no one could look at her face and think of anything earthly.  do not fear; i shall not profane it by description; it was beautiful exceedingly.  all that i had ever seen or dreamed of loveliness was in that matchless living picture by the hand of the divine artist.  so deeply did it move me that, without a thought of the impropriety of the act, i unconsciously bared my head, as a devout catholic or well-bred protestant uncovers before an image of the blessed virgin.  the maiden showed no displeasure; she merely turned her glorious dark eyes upon me with a look that made me catch my breath, and without other recognition of my act passed into the house.  for a moment i stood motionless, hat in hand, painfully conscious of my rudeness, yet so dominated by the emotion inspired by that vision of incomparable beauty that my penitence was less poignant than it should have been.  then i went my way, leaving my heart behind.  in the natural course of things i should probably have remained away until nightfall, but by the middle of the afternoon i was back in the little garden, affecting an interest in the few foolish flowers that i had never before observed.  my hope was vain; she did not appear.'to a night of unrest succeeded a day of expectation and disappointment, but on the day after, as i wandered aimlessly about the neighborhood, i met her.  of course i did not repeat my folly of uncovering, nor venture by even so much as too long a look to manifest an interest in her; yet my heart was beating audibly.  i trembled and consciously colored as she turned her big black eyes upon me with a look of obvious recognition entirely devoid of boldness or coquetry.'i will not weary you with particulars; many times afterward i met the maiden, yet never either addressed her or sought to fix her attention.  nor did i take any action toward making her acquaintance.  perhaps my forbearance, requiring so supreme an effort of self-denial, will not be entirely clear to you.  that i was heels over head in love is true, but who can overcome his habit of thought, or reconstruct his character?'i was what some foolish persons are pleased to call, and others, more foolish, are pleased to be called - an aristocrat; and despite her beauty, her charms and graces, the girl was not of my class.  i had learned her name - which it is needless to speak - and something of her family.  she was an orphan, a dependent niece of the impossible elderly fat woman in whose lodging-house she lived.  my income was small and i lacked the talent for marrying; it is perhaps a gift.  an alliance with that family would condemn me to its manner of life, part me from my books and studies, and in a social sense reduce me to the ranks.  it is easy to deprecate such considerations as these and i have not retained myself for the defense.  let judgment be entered against me, but in strict justice all my ancestors for generations should be made co-defendants and i be permitted to plead in mitigation of punishment the imperious mandate of heredity.  to a mã©salliance of that kind every globule of my ancestral blood spoke in opposition.  in brief, my tastes, habits, instinct, with whatever of reason my love had left me - all fought against it.  moreover, i was an irreclaimable sentimentalist, and found a subtle charm in an impersonal and spiritual relation which acquaintance might vulgarize and marriage would certainly dispel.  no woman, i argued, is what this lovely creature seems.  love is a delicious dream; why should i bring about my own awakening?'the course dictated by all this sense and sentiment was obvious.  honor, pride, prudence, preservation of my ideals - all commanded me to go away, but for that i was too weak.  the utmost that i could do by a mighty effort of will was to cease meeting the girl, and that i did.  i even avoided the chance encounters of the garden, leaving my lodging only when i knew that she had gone to her music lessons, and returing after nightfall.  yet all the while i was as one in a trance, indulging the most fascinating fancies and ordering my entire intellectual life in accordance with my dream.  ah, my friend, as one whose actions have a traceable relation to reason, you cannot know the fool's paradise in which i lived.'one evening the devil put it into my head to be an unspeakable idiot.  by apparently careless and purposeless questioning i learned from my gossipy landlady that the young woman's bedroom adjoined my own, a partywall between.  yielding to a sudden and coarse impulse i gently rapped on the wall.  there was no response, naturally, but i was in no mood to accept a rebuke.  a madness was upon me and i repeated the folly, the offense, but again ineffectually, and i had the decency to desist.'an hour later, while absorbed in some of my infernal studies, i heard, or thought i heard, my signal answered.  flinging down my books i sprang to the wall and as steadily as my beating heart would permit gave three slow taps upon it.  this time the response was distinct, unmistakable: one, two, three - an exact repetition of my signal.  that was all i could elicit, but it was enough - too much.'the next evening, and for many evenings afterward, that folly went on, i always having "the last word".  during the whole period i was deliriously happy, but with the perversity of my nature i persevered in my resolution not to see her.  then, as i should have expected, i got no further answers.  "she is disgusted," i said to myself, "with what she thinks my timidity in making no more definite advances"; and i resolved to seek her and make her acquaintance and - what?  i did not know, nor do i now know, what might have come of it.  i know only that i passed days and days trying to meet her, and all in vain; she was invisible as well as inaudible.  i haunted the streets where we had met, but she did not come.  from my window i watched the garden in front of her house, but she passed neither in nor out.  i fell into the deepest dejection, believing that she had gone away , yet took no steps to resolve my doubt by inquiry of my landlady, to whom, indeed, i had taken an unconquerable aversion from her having once spoken of the girl with less of reverence than i thought befitting.'there came a fateful night.  worn out with emotion, irresolution and despondency, i had retired early and fallen into such sleep as was still possible to me.  in the middle of the night something--some malign power bent upon the wrecking of my peace forever--caused me to open my eyes and sit up, wide awake and listening intently for i knew not what.  then i thought i heard a faint tapping on the wall--the mere ghost of the familiar signal.  in a few moments it was repeated: one, two, three--no louder than before, but addressing a sense alert and strained to receive it.  i was about to reply when the adversary of peace again intervened in my affairs with a rascally suggestion of retaliation.  she had long and cruelly ignored me; now i would ignore her.  incredible fatuity--may god forgive it!  all the rest of the night i lay awake, fortifying my obstinacy with shameless justifications and--listening.'late the next morning, as i was leaving the house, i met my landlady, entering.' "good morning, mr. dampier," she said.  "have you heard the news?"'i replied in words that i had heard no news; in manner, that i did not care to hear any.  the manner escaped her observation.' "about the sick young lady next door," she babbled on.  "what!  you did not know? why, she has been ill for weeks. and now--"'i almost sprang upon her. "and now," i cried, "now what?'' "she is dead."'that is not the whole story.  in the middle of the night, as i learned later, the patient, awakening from a long stupor after a week of delirium, had asked -- it was her last utterance -- that her bed be moved to the opposite side of the room.  those in attendance had thought the request a vagary of her delirium, but had complied.  and there the poor passing soul had exerted its failing will to restore a broken connection -- a golden thread of sentiment between its innocence and a monstrous baseness owing a blind, brutal allegiance to the law of self.'what reparation could i make?  are there masses that can be said for the repose of souls that are abroad such nights as this -- spirits "blown about by the viewless winds" -- coming in the storm and darkness with signs and portents, hints of memory and presages of doom?'this is the third visitation.  on the first occasion i was too skeptical to do more than verify by natural methods the character of the incident; on the second, i responded to the signal after it had been several times repeated, but without result. to-night's recurrence completes the 'fatal triad' expounded by parapelius necromantius.  there is no more to tell.'when dampier had finished his story i could think of nothing relevant that i cared to say, and to question him would have been a hideous impertinence.  i rose and bade him good night in a way to convey to him a sense of my sympathy, which he silently acknowledged by a pressure of the hand.  that night, alone with his sorrow and remorse, he passed into the unknown.one sunny afternoon in the autumn of the year 1861, a soldier lay in a clump of laurel by the side of a road in western virginia. he lay at full length, upon his stomach, his feet resting upon the toes, his head upon the left forearm. his extended right hand loosely grasped his rifle. but for the somewhat methodical disposition of his limbs and a slight rhythmic movement of the cartridge-box at the back of his belt, he might have been thought to be dead. he was asleep at his post of duty. but if detected he would be dead shortly afterward, that being the just and legal penalty of his crime.the clump of laurel in which the criminal lay was in the angle of a road which, after ascending, southward, a steep acclivity to that point, turned sharply to the west, running along the summit for perhaps one hundred yards. there it turned southward again and went zigzagging downward through the forest. at the salient of that second angle was a large flat rock, jutting out from the ridge to the northward, overlooking the deep valley from which the road ascended. the rock capped a high cliff; a stone dropped from its outer edge would have fallen sheer downward one thousand feet to the tops of the pines. the angle where the soldier lay was on another spur of the same cliff. had he been awake he would have commanded a view, not only of the short arm of the road and the jutting rock but of the entire profile of the cliff below it. it might well have made him giddy to look.the country was wooded everywhere except at the bottom of the valley to the northward, where there was a small natural meadow, through which flowed a stream scarcely visible from the valley's rim. this open ground looked hardly larger than an ordinary door-yard, but was really several acres in extent. its green was more vivid than that of the enclosing forest. away beyond it rose a line of giant cliffs similar to those upon which we are supposed to stand in our survey of the savage scene, and through which the road had somehow made its climb to the summit. the configuration of the valley, indeed, was such that from out point of observation it seemed entirely shut in, and one could not but have wondered how the road which found a way out of it had found a way into it, and whence came and whither went the waters of the stream that parted the meadow two thousand feet below.no country is so wild and difficult but men will make it a theatre of war; concealed in the forest at the bottom of that military rat-trap, in which half a hundred men in possession of the exits might have starved an army to submission, lay five regiments of federal infantry. they had marched all the previous day and night and were resting. at nightfall they would take to the road again, climb to the place where their unfaithful sentinel now slept, and, descending the other slope of the ridge, fall upon a camp of the enemy at about midnight. their hope was to surprise it, for the road led to the rear of it. in case of failure their position would be perilous in the extreme; and fail they surely would should accident or vigilance apprise the enemy of the movement.the sleeping sentinel in the clump of laurel was a young virginian named carter druse. he was the son of wealthy parents, an only child, and had known such ease and cultivation and high living as wealth and taste were able to command in the mountain country of western virginia. his home was but a few miles from where he now lay. one morning he had risen from the breakfast table and said, quietly and gravely: "father, a union regiment has arrived at grafton. i am going to join it."the father lifted his leonine head, looked at the son a moment in silence, and replied: "go, carter, and, whatever may occur, do what you conceive to be your duty. virginia, to which you are a traitor, must get on without you. should we both live to the end of the war, we will speak further of the matter. your mother, as the physician has informed you, is in a most critical condition; at the best she cannot be with us longer than a few weeks, but that time is precious. it would be better not to disturb her."so carter druse, bowing reverently to his father, who returned the salute with a stately courtesy which masked a breaking heart, left the home of his childhood to go soldiering. by conscience and courage, by deeds of devotion and daring, he soon commended himself to his fellows and his officers; and it was to these qualities and to some knowledge of the country that he owed his selection for his present perilous duty at the extreme outpost. nevertheless, fatigue had been stronger than resolution, and he had fallen asleep. what good or bad angel came in a dream to rouse him from his state of crime who shall say? without a movement, without a sound, in the profound silence and the languor of the late afternoon, some invisible messenger of fate touched with unsealing finger the eyes of his consciousness--whispered into the ear of his spirit the mysterious awakening word which no human lips have ever spoken, no human memory ever has recalled. he quietly raised his forehead from his arm and looked between the masking stems of the laurels, instinctively closing his right hand about the stock of his rifle.his first feeling was a keen artistic delight. on a colossal pedestal, the cliff, motionless at the extreme edge of the capping rock and sharply outlined against the sky, was an equestrian statue of impressive dignity. the figure of the man sat the figure of the horse, straight and soldierly, but with the repose of a grecian god carved in the marble which limits the suggestion of activity. the grey costume harmonised with its aerial background; the metal of accoutrement and caparison was softened and subdued by the shadow; the animal's skin had no points of high light. a carbine, strikingly foreshortened, lay across the pommel of the saddle, kept in place by the right hand grasping it at the "grip"; the left hand, holding the bridle rein, was invisible. in silhouette against the sky, the profile of the horse was cut with the sharpness of a cameo; it looked across the heights of air to the confronting cliffs beyond. the face of the rider, turned slightly to the left, showed only an outline of temple and beard; he was looking downward to the bottom of the valley. magnified by its lift against the sky and by the soldier's testifying sense of the formidableness of a near enemy, the group appeared of heroic, almost colossal, size.for an instant druse had a strange, half-defined feeling that he had slept to the end of the war and was looking upon a noble work of art reared upon that commanding eminence to commemorate the deeds of an heroic past of which he had been an inglorious part. the feeling was dispelled by a slight movement of the group; the horse, without moving its feet, had drawn its body slightly backward from the verge; the man remained immobile as before. broad awake and keenly alive to the significance of the situation, druse now brought the butt of his rifle against his cheek by cautiously pushing the barrel forward through the bushes, cocked the piece, and, glancing through the sights, covered a vital spot of the horseman's breast. a touch upon the trigger and all would have been well with carter druse. at that instant the horseman turned his head and looked in the direction of his concealed foeman--seemed to look into his very face, into his eyes, into his brave compassionate heart.is it, then, so terrible to kill an enemy in war--an enemy who has surprised a secret vital to the safety of oneself and comrades--an enemy more formidable for his knowledge than all his army for its numbers? carter druse grew deathly pale; he shook in every limb, turned faint, and saw the statuesque group before him as black figures, rising, falling, moving unsteadily in arcs of circles in a fiery sky. his hand fell away from his weapon, his head slowly dropped until his face rested on the leaves in which he lay. this courageous gentleman and hardy soldier was near swooning from intensity of emotion.it was not for long; in another moment his face was raised from earth, his hands resumed their places on the rifle, his forefinger sought the trigger; mind, heart, and eyes were clear, conscience and reason sound. he could not hope to capture that enemy; to alarm him would but send him dashing to his camp with his fatal news. the duty of the soldier was plain: the man must be shot dead from ambush--without warning, without a moment's spiritual preparation, with never so much as an unspoken prayer, he must be sent to his account. but no--there is a hope; he may have discovered nothing--perhaps he is but admiring the sublimity of the landscape. if permitted, he may turn and ride carelessly away in the direction whence he came. surely it will be possible to judge at the instant of his withdrawing whether he knows. it may well be that his fixity of attention--druse turned his head and looked below, through the deeps of air downward, as from the surface to the bottom of a translucent sea. he saw creeping across the green meadow a sinuous line of figures of men and horses--some foolish commander was permitting the soldiers of his escort to water their beasts in the open, in plain view from a hundred summits!druse withdrew his eyes from the valley and fixed them again upon the group of man and horse in the sky, and again it was through the sights of his rifle. but this time his aim was at the horse. in his memory, as if they were a divine mandate, rang the words of his father at their parting: "whatever may occur, do what you conceive to be your duty." he was calm now. his teeth were firmly but not rigidly closed; his nerves were as tranquil as a sleeping babe's--not a tremor affected any muscle of his body; his breathing, until suspended in the act of taking aim, was regular and slow. duty had conquered; the spirit had said to the body: "peace, be still." he fired.at that moment an officer of the federal force, who, in a spirit of adventure or in quest of knowledge, had left the hidden bivouac in the valley, and, with aimless feet, had made his way to the lower edge of a small open space near the foot of the cliff, was considering what he had to gain by pushing his exploration farther. at a distance of a quarter-mile before him, but apparently at a stone's-throw, rose from its fringe of pines the gigantic face of rock, towering to so great a height above him that it made him giddy to look up to where its edge cut a sharp, rugged line against the sky. at some distance away to his right it presented a clean, vertical profile against a background of blue sky to a point half of the way down, and of distant hills hardly less blue thence to the tops of the trees at its base. lifting his eyes to the dizzy altitude of its summit, the officer saw an astonishing sight--a man on horseback riding down into the valley through the air!straight upright sat the rider, in military fashion, with a firm seat in the saddle, a strong clutch upon the rein to hold his charger from too impetuous a plunge. from his bare head his long hair streamed upward, waving like a plume. his right hand was concealed in the cloud of the horse's lifted mane. the animal's body was as level as if every hoof-stroke encountered the resistant earth. its motions were those of a wild gallop, but even as the officer looked they ceased, with all the legs thrown sharply forward as in the act of alighting from a leap. but this was a flight!filled with amazement and terror by this apparition of a horseman in the sky--half believing himself the chosen scribe of some new apocalypse, the officer was overcome by the intensity of his emotions; his legs failed him and he fell. almost at the same instant he heard a crashing sound in the trees--a sound that died without an echo, and all was still.the officer rose to his feet, trembling. the familiar sensation of an abraded shin recalled his dazed faculties. pulling himself together, he ran rapidly obliquely away from the cliff to a point a half-mile from its foot; thereabout he expected to find his man; and thereabout he naturally failed. in the fleeting instant of his vision his imagination had been so wrought upon by the apparent grace and ease and intention of the marvellous performance that it did not occur to him that the line of march of aerial cavalry is directed downward, and that he could find the objects of his search at the very foot of the cliff. a half-hour later he returned to camp.this officer was a wise man; he knew better than to tell an incredible truth. he said nothing of what he had seen. but when the commander asked him if in his scout he had learned anything of advantage to the expedition, he answered:"yes, sir; there is no road leading down into this valley from the southward."the commander, knowing better, smiled.after firing his shot private carter druse reloaded his rifle and resumed his watch. ten minutes had hardly passed when a federal sergeant crept cautiously to him on hands and knees. druse neither turned his head nor looked at him, but lay without motion or sign of recognition."did you fire?" the sergeant whispered."yes.""at what?""a horse. it was standing on yonder rock--pretty far out. you see it is no longer there. it went over the cliff."the man's face was white, but he showed no other sign of emotion. having answered, he turned away his face and said no more. the sergeant did not understand."see here, druse," he said, after a moment's silence, "it's no use making a mystery. i order you to report. was there anybody on the horse?""yes.""who?""my father."the sergeant rose to his feet and walked away. "good god!" he said.ia man stood upon a railroad bridge in northern alabama, looking down into the swift water twenty feet below. the man's hands were behind his back, the wrists bound with a cord. a rope closely encircled his neck. it was attached to a stout cross-timber above his head and the slack fell to the level of his knees. some loose boards laid upon the sleepers supporting the metals of the railway supplied a footing for him and his executioners--two private soldiers of the federal army, directed by a sergeant who in civil life may have been a deputy sheriff. at a short remove upon the same temporary platform was an officer in the uniform of his rank, armed. he was a captain. a sentinel at each end of the bridge stood with his rifle in the position known as "support," that is to say, vertical in front of the left shoulder, the hammer resting on the forearm thrown straight across the chest--a formal and unnatural position, enforcing an erect carriage of the body. it did not appear to be the duty of these two men to know what was occurring at the center of the bridge; they merely blockaded the two ends of the foot planking that traversed it.beyond one of the sentinels nobody was in sight; the railroad ran straight away into a forest for a hundred yards, then, curving, was lost to view. doubtless there was an outpost farther along. the other bank of the stream was open ground--a gentle acclivity topped with a stockade of vertical tree trunks, loopholed for rifles, with a single embrasure through which protruded the muzzle of a brass cannon commanding the bridge. midway of the slope between the bridge and fort were the spectators--a single company of infantry in line, at "parade rest," the butts of the rifles on the ground, the barrels inclining slightly backward against the right shoulder, the hands crossed upon the stock. a lieu tenant stood at the right of the line, the point of his sword upon the ground, his left hand resting upon his right. excepting the group of four at the center of the bridge, not a man moved. the company faced the bridge, staring stonily, motionless. the sentinels, facing the banks of the stream, might have been statues to adorn the bridge. the captain stood with folded arms, silent, observing the work of his subordinates, but making no sign. death is a dignitary who when he comes announced is to be received with formal manifestations of respect, even by those most familiar with him. in the code of military etiquette silence and fixity are forms of deference.the man who was engaged in being hanged was apparently about thirty-five years of age. he was a civilian, if one might judge from his habit, which was that of a planter. his features were good--a straight nose, firm mouth, broad forehead, from which his long, dark hair was combed straight back, falling behind his ears to the collar of his well-fitting frock coat. he wore a mustache and pointed beard, but no whiskers; his eyes were large and dark gray, and had a kindly expression which one would hardly have expected in one whose neck was in the hemp. evidently this was no vulgar assassin. the liberal military code makes provision for hanging many kinds of persons, and gentlemen are not excluded.the preparations being complete, the two private soldiers stepped aside and each drew away the plank upon which he had been standing. the sergeant turned to the captain, saluted and placed himself immediately behind that officer, who in turn moved apart one pace. these movements left the condemned man and the sergeant standing on the two ends of the same plank, which spanned three of the cross-ties of the bridge. the end upon which the civilian stood almost, but not quite, reached a fourth. this plank had been held in place by the weight of the captain; it was now held by that of the sergeant. at a signal from the former the latter would step aside, the plank would tilt and the condemned man go down between two ties. the arrangement commended itself to his judgment as simple and effective. his face had not been covered nor his eyes bandaged. he looked a moment at his "unsteadfast footing," then let his gaze wander to the swirling water of the stream racing madly beneath his feet. a piece of dancing driftwood caught his attention and his eyes followed it down the current. how slowly it appeared to move, what a sluggish stream!he closed his eyes in order to fix his last thoughts upon his wife and children. the water, touched to gold by the early sun, the brooding mists under the banks at some distance down the stream, the fort, the soldiers, the piece of drift--all had distracted him. and now he became conscious of a new disturbance. striking through the thought of his dear ones was a sound which he could neither ignore nor understand, a sharp, distinct, metallic percussion like the stroke of a blacksmith's hammer upon the anvil; it had the same ringing quality. he wondered what it was, and whether immeasurably distant or near by--it seemed both. its recurrence was regular, but as slow as the tolling of a death knell. he awaited each stroke with impatience and--he knew not why--apprehension. the intervals of silence grew progressively longer, the delays became maddening. with their greater infrequency the sounds increased in strength and sharpness. they hurt his ear like the thrust of a knife; he feared he would shriek. what he heard was the ticking of his watch.he unclosed his eyes and saw again the water below him. "if i could free my hands," he thought, "i might throw off the noose and spring into the stream. by diving i could evade the bullets and, swimming vigorously, reach the bank, take to the woods and get away home. my home, thank god, is as yet outside their lines; my wife and little ones are still beyond the invader's farthest advance."as these thoughts, which have here to be set down in words, were flashed into the doomed man's brain rather than evolved from it the captain nodded to the sergeant. the sergeant stepped aside.iipeyton farquhar was a well-to-do planter, of an old and highly respected alabama family. being a slave owner and like other slave owners a politician he was naturally an original secessionist and ardently devoted to the southern cause. circumstances of an imperious nature, which it is unnecessary to relate here, had prevented him from taking service with the gallant army that had fought the disastrous campaigns ending with the fall of corinth, and he chafed under the inglorious restraint, longing for the release of his energies, the larger life of the soldier, the opportunity for distinction. that opportunity, he felt, would come, as it comes to all in war time. meanwhile he did what he could. no service was too humble for him to perform in aid of the south, no adventure too perilous for him to undertake if consistent with the character of a civilian who was at heart a soldier, and who in good faith and without too much qualification assented to at least a part of the frankly villainous dictum that all is fair in love and war.one evening while farquhar and his wife were sitting on a rustic bench near the entrance to his grounds, a gray-clad soldier rode up to the gate and asked for a drink of water. mrs. farquhar was only toe, happy to serve him with her own white hands. while she was fetching the water her husband approached the dusty horseman and inquired eagerly for news from the front."the yanks are repairing the railroads," said the man, "and are getting ready for another advance. they have reached the owl creek bridge, put it in order and built a stockade on the north bank. the commandant has issued an order, which is posted everywhere, declaring that any civilian caught interfering with the railroad, its bridges, tunnels or trains will be summarily hanged. i saw the order.""how far is it to the owl creek bridge?" farquhar asked."about thirty miles.""is there no force on this side the creek?""only a picket post half a mile out, on the railroad, and a single sentinel at this end of the bridge.""suppose a man--a civilian and student of hanging--should elude the picket post and perhaps get the better of the sentinel," said farquhar, smiling, "what could he accomplish?"the soldier reflected. "i was there a month ago," he replied. "i observed that the flood of last winter had lodged a great quantity of driftwood against the wooden pier at this end of the bridge. it is now dry and would burn like tow."the lady had now brought the water, which the soldier drank. he thanked her ceremoniously, bowed to her husband and rode away. an hour later, after nightfall, he repassed the plantation, going northward in the direction from which he had come. he was a federal scout.iiias peyton farquhar fell straight downward through the bridge he lost consciousness and was as one already dead. from this state he was awakened--ages later, it seemed to him--by the pain of a sharp pressure upon his throat, followed by a sense of suffocation. keen, poignant agonies seemed to shoot from his neck downward through every fiber of his body and limbs. these pains appeared to flash along well-defined lines of ramification and to beat with an inconceivably rapid periodicity. they seemed like streams of pulsating fire heating him to an intolerable temperature. as to his head, he was conscious of nothing but a feeling of fulness--of congestion. these sensations were unaccompanied by thought. the intellectual part of his nature was already effaced; he had power only to feel, and feeling was torment. he was conscious of motion. encompassed in a luminous cloud, of which he was now merely the fiery heart, without material substance, he swung through unthinkable arcs of oscillation, like a vast pendulum. then all at once, with terrible suddenness, the light about him shot upward with the noise of a loud splash; a frightful roaring was in his ears, and all was cold and dark. the power of thought was restored; he knew that the rope had broken and he had fallen into the stream. there was no additional strangulation; the noose about his neck was already suffocating him and kept the water from his lungs. to die of hanging at the bottom of a river!--the idea seemed to him ludicrous. he opened his eyes in the darkness and saw above him a gleam of light, but how distant, how inaccessible! he was still sinking, for the light became fainter and fainter until it was a mere glimmer. then it began to grow and brighten, and he knew that he was rising toward the surface--knew it with reluctance, for he was now very comfortable. "to be hanged and drowned," he thought? "that is not so bad; but i do not wish to be shot. no; i will not be shot; that is not fair."he was not conscious of an effort, but a sharp pain in his wrist apprised him that he was trying to free his hands. he gave the struggle his attention, as an idler might observe the feat of a juggler, without interest in the outcome. what splendid effort!--what magnificent, what superhuman strength! ah, that was a fine endeavor! bravo! the cord fell away; his arms parted and floated upward, the hands dimly seen on each side in the growing light. he watched them with a new interest as first one and then the other pounced upon the noose at his neck. they tore it away and thrust it fiercely aside, its undulations resembling those of a water snake. "put it back, put it back!" he thought he shouted these words to his hands, for the undoing of the noose had been succeeded by the direst pang that he had yet experienced. his neck ached horribly; his brain was on fire; his heart, which had been fluttering faintly, gave a great leap, trying to force itself out at his mouth. his whole body was racked and wrenched with an insupportable anguish! but his disobedient hands gave no heed to the command. they beat the water vigorously with quick, downward strokes, forcing him to the surface. he felt his head emerge; his eyes were blinded by the sunlight; his chest expanded convulsively, and with a supreme and crowning agony his lungs engulfed a great draught of air, which instantly he expelled in a shriek!he was now in full possession of his physical senses. they were, indeed, preternaturally keen and alert. something in the awful disturbance of his organic system had so exalted and refined them that they made record of things never before perceived. he felt the ripples upon his face and heard their separate sounds as they struck. he looked at the forest on the bank of the stream, saw the individual trees, the leaves and the veining of each leaf--saw the very insects upon them: the locusts, the brilliant-bodied flies, the grey spiders stretching their webs from twig to twig. he noted the prismatic colors in all the dewdrops upon a million blades of grass. the humming of the gnats that danced above the eddies of the stream, the beating of the dragon flies' wings, the strokes of the water-spiders' legs, like oars which had lifted their boat--all these made audible music. a fish slid along beneath his eyes and he heard the rush of its body parting the water.he had come to the surface facing down the stream; in a moment the visible world seemed to wheel slowly round, himself the pivotal point, and he saw the bridge, the fort, the soldiers upon the bridge, the captain, the sergeant, the two privates, his executioners. they were in silhouette against the blue sky. they shouted and gesticulated, pointing at him. the captain had drawn his pistol, but did not fire; the others were unarmed. their movements were grotesque and horrible, their forms gigantic.suddenly he heard a sharp report and something struck the water smartly within a few inches of his head, spattering his face with spray. he heard a second report, and saw one of the sentinels with his rifle at his shoulder, a light cloud of blue smoke rising from the muzzle. the man in the water saw the eye of the man on the bridge gazing into his own through the sights of the rifle. he observed that it was a grey eye and remembered having read that grey eyes were keenest, and that all famous marksmen had them. nevertheless, this one had missed.a counter-swirl had caught farquhar and turned him half round; he was again looking into the forest on the bank opposite the fort. the sound of a clear, high voice in a monotonous singsong now rang out behind him and came across the water with a distinctness that pierced and subdued all other sounds, even the beating of the ripples in his ears. although no soldier, he had frequented camps enough to know the dread significance of that deliberate, drawling, aspirated chant; the lieu. tenant on shore was taking a part in the morning's work. how coldly and pitilessly--with what an even, calm intonation, presaging, and enforcing tranquillity in the men--with what accurately measured inter vals fell those cruel words:"attention, company! . . shoulder arms! . . . ready! . . . aim! . . . fire!"farquhar dived--dived as deeply as he could. the water roared in his ears like the voice of niagara, yet he heard the dulled thunder of the volley and, rising again toward the surface, met shining bits of metal, singularly flattened, oscillating slowly downward. some of them touched him on the face and hands, then fell away, continuing their descent. one lodged between his collar and neck; it was uncomfortably warm and he snatched it out.as he rose to the surface, gasping for breath, he saw that he had been a long time under water; he was perceptibly farther down stream nearer to safety. the soldiers had almost finished reloading; the metal ramrods flashed all at once in the sunshine as they were drawn from the barrels, turned in the air, and thrust into their sockets. the two sentinels fired again, independently and ineffectually.the hunted man saw all this over his shoulder; he was now swimming vigorously with the current. his brain was as energetic as his arms and legs; he thought with the rapidity of lightning.the officer," he reasoned, "will not make that martinet's error a second time. it is as easy to dodge a volley as a single shot. he has probably already given the command to fire at will. god help me, i cannot dodge them all!"an appalling plash within two yards of him was followed by a loud, rushing sound, diminuendo, which seemed to travel back through the air to the fort and died in an explosion which stirred the very river to its deeps!a rising sheet of water curved over him, fell down upon him, blinded him, strangled him! the cannon had taken a hand in the game. as he shook his head free from the commotion of the smitten water he heard the deflected shot humming through the air ahead, and in an instant it was cracking and smashing the branches in the forest beyond."they will not do that again," he thought; "the next time they will use a charge of grape. i must keep my eye upon the gun; the smoke will apprise me--the report arrives too late; it lags behind the missile. that is a good gun."suddenly he felt himself whirled round and round--spinning like a top. the water, the banks, the forests, the now distant bridge, fort and men--all were commingled and blurred. objects were represented by their colors only; circular horizontal streaks of color--that was all he saw. he had been caught in a vortex and was being whirled on with a velocity of advance and gyration that made him giddy and sick. in a few moments he was flung upon the gravel at the foot of the left bank of the stream--the southern bank--and behind a projecting point which concealed him from his enemies. the sudden arrest of his motion, the abrasion of one of his hands on the gravel, restored him, and he wept with delight. he dug his fingers into the sand, threw it over himself in handfuls and audibly blessed it. it looked like diamonds, rubies, emeralds; he could think of nothing beautiful which it did not resemble. the trees upon the bank were giant garden plants; he noted a definite order in their arrangement, inhaled the fragrance of their blooms. a strange, roseate light shone through the spaces among their trunks and the wind made in their branches the music of æolian harps. he had no wish to perfect his escape--was content to remain in that enchanting spot until retaken.a whiz and rattle of grapeshot among the branches high above his head roused him from his dream. the baffled cannoneer had fired him a random farewell. he sprang to his feet, rushed up the sloping bank, and plunged into the forest.all that day he traveled, laying his course by the rounding sun. the forest seemed interminable; nowhere did he discover a break in it, not even a woodman's road. he had not known that he lived in so wild a region. there was something uncanny in the revelation.by nightfall he was fatigued, footsore, famishing. the thought of his wife and children urged him on. at last he found a road which led him in what he knew to be the right direction. it was as wide and straight as a city street, yet it seemed untraveled. no fields bordered it, no dwelling anywhere. not so much as the barking of a dog suggested human habitation. the black bodies of the trees formed a straight wall on both sides, terminating on the horizon in a point, like a diagram in a lesson in perspective. overhead, as he looked up through this rift in the wood, shone great garden stars looking unfamiliar and grouped in strange constellations. he was sure they were arranged in some order which had a secret and malign significance. the wood on either side was full of singular noises, among which--once, twice, and again--he distinctly heard whispers in an unknown tongue.his neck was in pain and lifting his hand to it found it horribly swollen. he knew that it had a circle of black where the rope had bruised it. his eyes felt congested; he could no longer close them. his tongue was swollen with thirst; he relieved its fever by thrusting it forward from between his teeth into the cold air. how softly the turf had carpeted the untraveled avenue--he could no longer feel the roadway beneath his feet!doubtless, despite his suffering, he had fallen asleep while walking, for now he sees another scene--perhaps he has merely recovered from a delirium. he stands at the gate of his own home. all is as he left it, and all bright and beautiful in the morning sunshine. he must have traveled the entire night. as he pushes open the gate and passes up the wide white walk, he sees a flutter of female garments; his wife, looking fresh and cool and sweet, steps down from the veranda to meet him. at the bottom of the steps she stands waiting, with a smile of ineffable joy, an attitude of matchless grace and dignity. ah, how beautiful she is! he springs forward with extended arms. as he is about to clasp her he feels a stunning blow upon the back of the neck; a blinding white light blazes all about him with a sound like the shock of a cannon--then all is darkness and silence!peyton farquhar was dead; his body, with a broken neck, swung gently from side to side beneath the timbers of the owl creek bridge.when i had a house in sri lanka, my parents came out one winter to see me. originally i had felt some qualms about encouraging their visit. any one of several things--the constant heat, the unaccustomed food and drinking water, even the presence of a leprosy clinic a quarter of a mile from the house might easily have an adverse effect on them in one way or another. but i had underestimated their resilience; they made a greater show of adaptability than i had thought possible, and seemed entirely content with everything. they claimed not to mind the lack of running water in the bathrooms, and regularly praised the curries prepared by appuhamy, the resident cook. both of them being in their seventies, they were not tempted by the more distant or inaccessible points of interest. it was enough for them to stay around the house reading, sleeping, taking twilight dips in the ocean, and going on short trips along the coast by hired car. if the driver stopped unexpectedly at a shrine to sacrifice a coconut, they were delighted, and if they came upon a group of elephants lumbering along the road, the car had to be parked some distance up ahead, so that they could watch them approach and file past. they had no interest in taking photographs, and this spared me what is perhaps the most taxing duty of cicerone: the repeated waits while the ritual between man and machine is observed. they were ideal guests.colombo, where all the people i knew lives, was less than a hundred miles away. several times we went up for weekends, which i arranged with friends by telephone beforehand. there we had tea on the wide verandas of certain houses in cinnamon gardens, and sat at dinners with professors from the university, protestant ministers, and assorted members of the government. (many of the sinhalese found it strange that i should call my parents by their first names, dodd and hannah; several of them inquired if i were actually their son or had been adopted.) these weekends in the city were hot and exhausting, and they were always happy to get back to the house, where they could change into comfortable clothing.one sunday not long before they were due to return to america, we decided to take in the horse races at gintota, where there are also some botanical gardens that hannah wanted to see. i engaged rooms at the new oriental in galle and we had lunch there before setting out.as usual, the events were late in starting. it was the spectators, in any case, who were the focus of interest. the phalanx of women in their shot-silk saris moved hannah to cries of delight. the races themselves were something of a disappointment. as we left the grounds, dodd said with satisfaction: it'll be good to get back to the hotel and relax.but we were going to the botanical gardens, hannan reminded him. i'd like to have just a peek at them.dodd was not eager. those places cover a lot of territory, you know, he said.we'll look inside and come out again, she promised.the hired car took us to the entrance. dodd was tired, and as a result was having a certain amount of difficulty in walking. the last year or so i find my legs aren't' always doing exactly what i want 'em to do, he explained.you two amble along, hannah told us. i'll run up ahead and find out if there's anything to see.we stopped to look up at a clove tree; its powerful odor filled the air like a gas. when we turned to continue our walk, hannah was no longer in sight. we went on under the high vegetation, around a curve in the path, looked ahead, and still there was no sign of her.what does your mother think she's doing? the first thing we know she'll be lost.she's up ahead somewhere.soon, at the end of a short lane overhung by twisted lianas, we saw her, partially hidden by the gesticulating figure of a sinhalese standing next to her.what's going on? dodd hastened his steps. run over there, he told me, and i started ahead, walking fast. then i saw hannah's animated smile, and slowed my pace. she and the young man stood in front of a huge bank of brown spider orchids.ah! i thought we'd lost you, i said.look at these orchids. aren't they incredible?dodd came up, nodded at the young man, and examined the display of flowers. they look to me like skunk cabbage, he declared.the young man broke into wild laughter. dodd stared at him.this young man has been telling me the history of the garden, hannah began hurriedly. about the opposition to it, and how it finally came to be planted. it's interesting.the sinhalese beamed triumphantly. he wore white flannels and a crimson blazer, and his sleek black hair gave off a metallic blue glint in the sunlight.ordinarily i steer a determined course away from the anonymous person who tries to engage me in conversation. this time it was too late; encouraged by hannah, the stranger strolled beside her, back to the main path. dodd and i exchanged a glance, shrugged, and began to follow along behind.somewhere up at the end of the gardens a pavilion had been built under the high rain trees. it had a veranda where a few sarong- draped men reclined in long chairs. the young man stopped walking. now i invite you to a cold ginger beer.oh, hannah said, at a loss. well, yes. that would be nice. i'd welcome a chance to sit down.dodd peered at his wristwatch. i'll pass up the beer, but i'll sit and watch you.we sat and looked out at the lush greenness. the young man's conversation leapt from one subject to another; he seemed unable to follow any train of thought further than its inception. i put this down as a bad sign, and tried to tell from the inflections of hannah's voice whether she found him as disconcerting as i did.dodd was not listening. he found the heat of low-country ceylon oppressive, and it was easy to see that he was tired. thinking i might cover up the young man's chatter, i turned to dodd and began to talk about whatever came into my head: the resurgence of mask-making in ambalangoda, devil-dancing, the high incidence of crime among the fishermen converted to catholicism. dodd listened, but did no more than move his head now and then in response.suddenly i heard the young man saying to hannah: i have just the house for you. a godsend to fill your requirements. very quiet and protected.she laughed. mercy, no! we're not looking for a house. we're only going to be here a few weeks more.i looked hard at her, hoping she would take my glance as a warning against going on and mentioning the place where she was staying. the young man was not paying attention, in any case. quite all right. you are not buying houses. but you should see this house and tell your friends. a superior investment, no doubt about that. shall i introduce myself, please? justus gonzag, called sonny by friends.his smile, which was not a smile at all, gave me an unpleasant physical sensation.come anyway. a five-minute walk, guaranteed. he looked searchingly at hannah. i intend to give you a book of poems. my own. autographed for you with your name. that will make me very happy.oh, hannan said, a note of dismay in her voice. then she braced herself and smiled. that would be lovely. but you understand, we can't stay more than a minute.there was a silence. dodd inquired plaintively: can't we go in the car, at least?impossible, sir. we are having a very narrow road. car can't get through. i am arranging in a jiffy. he called out. a waiter came up, and he addressed him in sinhalese at some length. the man nodded and went inside. your driver is now bringing your car to this gate. very close by.this was going a little too far. i asked him how he though anyone was going to know which car was ours.no problem. i was present when you were leaving the pontiac. your driver is called wickramasinghe. up-country resident, most reliable. down here people are hopeless.i disliked him more each time he spoke. you're not from around here? i asked him.no, no! i'm a colombo chap. these people are impossible scoundrels. every one of the blighters has a knife in his belt, guaranteed.when the waiter brought the check, he signed it with a rapid flourish and stood up. shall we be going on to the house, then?no one answered, but all three of us rose and reluctantly moved off with him in the direction of the exit gate. the hired car was there; mr. wickramasinghe saluted us from behind the wheel.the afternoon heat had gone, leaving only a pocket here and there beneath the trees where the air was still. originally the lane where we were walking had been wide enough to admit a bullock- car, but the vegetation encroaching on each side had narrowed it to little more than a footpath.at the end of the lane were two concrete gateposts with no gate between them. we passed through, and went into a large compound bordered on two sides by ruined stables. with the exception of one small ell, the house was entirely hidden by high bushes and flowering trees. as we came to a doorway the young man stopped and turned to us, holding up one finger. no noises here, isn't it? only birds.it was the hour when the birds begin to awaken from their daytime lethargy. an indeterminate twittering came from the trees. he lowered his finger and turned back to the door. mornings they are singing. now not.oh, it's lovely, hannah told him.he led us through a series of dark empty rooms. here the _dhobi_ was washing the soiled clothing. this is the kitchen, you see? ceylon style. only the charcoal. my father was refusing paraffin and gas both. even in colombo.we huddled in a short corridor while he opened a door, reached in, and flooded the space inside with blinding light. it was a small room, made to seem still smaller by having given glistening crimson walls and ceiling. almost all the space was filled by a big bed with a satin coverlet of a slightly darker red. a row of straight-backed chairs stood along one wall. sit down and be comfy, our host advised us.we sat, staring at the bed and at the three framed pictures on the wall above its brass-spoked headboard: on the left a girl, in the middle our host, and on the right another young man. the portraits had the imprecision of passport photographs that have been enlarged to many times their original size.hannah coughed. she had nothing to say. the room gave off a cloying scent of ancient incense, as in a disused chapel. the feeling of absurdity i got from seeing us sitting there side by side, wedged in between the bed and the wall, was so powerful that it briefly paralyzed my mental processes. for once the young man was being silent; he sat stiffly, looking straight ahead, like someone at the theater.finally i had to say something. i turned to our host and asked him if he slept in this room. the question seemed to shock him. here? he cried, as if the thing were inconceivable. no, no! this house is unoccupied. no one sleeping on the premises. only a stout chap to watch out at night. excuse me one moment.he jumped up and hurried out of the room. we heard his footsteps echo in the corridor and then grow silent. from somewhere in the house there came the sonorous chiming of a grandfather's clock; its comfortable sound made the shiny blood-colored cubicle even more remote and unlikely.dodd stirred uncomfortably in his chair; the bed was too close for him to cross his legs. as soon as he comes back, we go, he muttered.he's looking for the book, i imagine, said hannah.we waited a while. then i said: look. if he's not back in two minutes, i move we just get up and leave. we can find out way out all right.hannah objected, saying it would be unpardonable.again we sat in silence, dodd now shielding his eyes from the glare. when sonny gonzag returned, he was carrying a glass of water which he drank standing in the doorway. his expression had altered: he now looked preoccupied, and he was breathing heavily.we slowly got to our feet, hannah still looking expectant.we are going, then? come. with the empty glass still in his hand he turned off the lights, shut the door behind us, opened another, and led us quickly through a sumptuous room furnished with large divans, coromandel screens, and bronze buddhas. we had no time to do more than glance from side to side as we followed him. as we went out through the front door, he called one peremptory word back into the house, presumably to the caretaker.there was a wide unkempt lawn on this side, where a few clumps of high areca palms were being slowly strangled by the sheaths of philodendron roots and leaves that encased their trunks. creepers had spread themselves unpleasantly over the tops of shrubs like the meshes of gigantic cobwebs. i knew that hannah was thinking of snakes. she kept her eyes on the ground, stepping carefully from flagstone to flagstone as we followed the exterior of the house around to the stables, and thence out into the lane.the swift twilight had come down. no one seemed disposed to speak. when we reached the car mr. wickramasinghe stood beside it.cheery-bye, then, and tell your friends to look for sonny gonzag when they are coming to gintota. he offered his hand to dodd first, then me, finally to hannah, and turned away.they were both very quiet on the way back to galle. the road was narrow and the blinding lights of oncoming cars made them nervous. during dinner we made no mention of the afternoon.at breakfast, on the veranda swept by the morning breeze, we felt sufficiently removed from the experience to discuss it. hannah said: i kept waking up in the night and seeing that awful bed.dodd groaned.i said it was like watching television without the sound. you saw everything, but you didn't get what was going on.the kid was completely non compos mentis. you could see that a mile away, dodd declared.hannah was not listening. it must have been a maid's room. but why would he take us there? i don't know; there's something terribly depressing about the whole thing. it makes me feel a little sick just to think about it. and that bed!well, stop thinking about it, then! dodd told her. i for one am going to put it right out of my mind. he waited. i feel better already. isn't that the way the buddhists do it?the sunny holiday continued for a few weeks more, with longer trips now to the east, to tissamaharana and the wild elephants in the yala preserve. we did not go to colombo again until it was time for me to put them onto the plane.the black weather of the monsoons was blowing in from the southwest as we drove up the coast. there was a violent downpour when we arrived in midafternoon at mount lavinia and checked into our rooms. the crashing of the waves outside my room was so loud that dodd had to shut the windows in order to hear what we were saying.i had taken advantage of the trip to colombo to arrange a talk with my lawyer, a telugu-speaking indian. we were to meet in the bar at the galleface, some miles up the coast. i'll be back at six, i told hannah. the rain had abated somewhat when i started out.damp winds moved through the lobby of the galleface, but the smoky air in the bar was stirred only by fans. as i entered, the first person i noticed was weston of the chartered bank. the lawyer had not yet come in, so i stood at the bar with weston and ordered a whiskey.didn't i see you in gintota at the races last month? with an elderly couple?i was there with my parents. i didn't notice you.i couldn't tell. it was too far away. but i saw the same three people alter with a local character. what did you think of sonny gonzag?i laughed. he dragged us off to his house.you know the story, i take it.i shook my head.the story, which he recounted with relish, began on the day after gonzag's wedding, when he stepped into a servant's room and found his bride in bed with the friend who had been best man. how he happened to have a pistol with him was not explained, but he shot them both in the face, and later chopped their bodies into pieces. as weston remarked: that sort of thing isn't too uncommon, of course. but it was the trial that caused the scandal. gonzag spent a few weeks in a mental hospital, and was discharged.you can imagine, said weston. political excitement. the poor go to jail for a handful of rice, but the rich can kill with impunity, and that sort of thing. you still see references to the case in the press now and then.i was thinking of the crimson blazer and the botanical gardens. no. i never heard about it, i said.he's mad as a hatter, but there he is, free to do whatever he feels like. and all he wants now is to get people into that house and show them the room where the great event took place. the more the merrier as far as he's concerned.i saw the indian come into the bar. it's unbelievable, but i believe it, i told weston.then i turned to greet the lawyer, who immediately complained of the stale air in the bar. we sat and talked in the lounge.i managed to get back to mount lavinia in time to bathe before dinner. as i lay in the tepid water, i tried to imagine the reactions of hannah and dodd when i told them what i had heard. i myself felt a solid satisfaction at knowing the rest of the story. but being old, they might well brood over it, working it up into an episode so unpleasant in retrospect that it stained the memory of their holiday. i still had not decided whether to tell them or not when i went to their room to take them down to dinner.we sat as far away from the music as we could get. hannah had dressed a little more elaborately than usual, and they both were speaking with more than their accustomed animation. i realized that they were happy to be returning to new york. halfway through he meal they began to review what they considered the highlights of their visit. they mentioned the temple of the tooth, the pair of bengal tiger cubs in dehiwala which they had petted but regretfully declined to purchase, the indonesian dinner on mr. bultjens's lawn, where the myna bird had hopped over to hannah and said: "eat it up," the cobra under the couch at mrs. de sylva's tea party.and that peculiar young man in the _strange_ house, hannah added meditatively.which one was that? asked dodd, frowning as he tried to remember. then it came to him. oh, god, he muttered. your special friend. he turned to me. your mother certainly can pick 'em.outside, the ocean roared. hannah seemed lost in thought. _i_ know what it was like! she exclaimed suddenly. it was like being shown around one of the temples by a _bhikku_. isn't that what they call them?dodd sniffed. some temple! he chuckled.no, i'm serious. that room had a particular meaning for him. it was like a sort of shrine.i looked at her. she had got to the core without needing the details. i felt that, too, i said. of course, there's no way of knowing.she smiled. well, what you don't know won't hurt you.i had heard her use the expression a hundred times without ever being able to understand what she meant by it, because it seemed so patently untrue. but for once it was apt. i nodded my head and said: that's right.a study in temperamentit was paul's afternoon to appear before the faculty of the pittsburgh high school to account for his various misdemeanors. he had been suspended a week ago, and his father had called at the principal's office and confessed his perplexity about his son. paul entered the faculty room suave and smiling. his clothes were a trifle outgrown, and the tan velvet on the collar of his open overcoat was frayed and worn; but for all that there was something of the dandy about him, and he wore an opal pin in his neatly knotted black four-in-hand, and a red carnation in his buttonhole. this latter adornment the faculty somehow felt was not properly significant of the contrite spirit befitting a boy under the ban of suspension.paul was tall for his age and very thin, with high, cramped shoulders and a narrow chest. his eyes were remarkable for a certain hysterical brilliancy, and he continually used them in a conscious, theatrical sort of way, peculiarly offensive in a boy. the pupils were abnormally large, as though he were addicted to belladonna, but there was a glassy glitter about them which that drug does not produce.when questioned by the principal as to why he was there paul stated, politely enough, that he wanted to come back to school. this was a lie, but paul was quite accustomed to lying; found it, indeed, indispensable for overcoming friction. his teachers were asked to state their respective charges against him, which they did with such a rancor and aggrievedness as evinced that this was not a usual case. disorder and impertinence were among the offenses named, yet each of his instructors felt that it was scarcely possible to put into words the real cause of the trouble, which lay in a sort of hysterically defiant manner of the boy's; in the contempt which they all knew he felt for them, and which he seemingly made not the least effort to conceal. once, when he had been making a synopsis of a paragraph at the blackboard, his english teacher had stepped to his side and attempted to guide his hand. paul had started back with a shudder and thrust his hands violently behind him. the astonished woman could scarcely have been more hurt and embarrassed had he struck at her. the insult was so involuntary and definitely personal as to be unforgettable. in one way and another he had made all his teachers, men and women alike, conscious of the same feeling of physical aversion. in one class he habitually sat with his hand shading his eyes; in another he always looked out of the window during the recitation; in another he made a running commentary on the lecture, with humorous intention.his teachers felt this afternoon that his whole attitude was symbolized by his shrug and his flippantly red carnation flower, and they fell upon him without mercy, his english teacher leading the pack. he stood through it smiling, his pale lips parted over his white teeth. (his lips were continually twitching, and be had a habit of raising his eyebrows that was contemptuous and irritating to the last degree.) older boys than paul had broken down and shed tears under that baptism of fire, but his set smile did not once desert him, and his only sign of discomfort was the nervous trembling of the fingers that toyed with the buttons of his overcoat, and an occasional jerking of the other hand that held his hat. paul was always smiling, always glancing about him, seeming to feel that people might be watching him and trying to detect something. this conscious expression, since it was as far as possible from boyish mirthfulness, was usually attributed to insolence or "smartness."as the inquisition proceeded one of his instructors repeated an impertinent remark of the boy's, and the principal asked him whether he thought that a courteous speech to have made a woman. paul shrugged his shoulders slightly and his eyebrows twitched."i don't know," he replied. "i didn't mean to be polite or impolite, either. i guess it's a sort of way i have of saying things regardless."the principal, who was a sympathetic man, asked him whether he didn't think that a way it would be well to get rid of. paul grinned and said he guessed so. when he was told that he could go he bowed gracefully and went out. his bow was but a repetition of the scandalous red carnation.his teachers were in despair, and his drawing master voiced the feeling of them all when he declared there was something about the boy which none of them understood. he added: "i don't really believe that smile of his comes altogether from insolence; there's something sort of haunted about it. the boy is not strong, for one thing. i happen to know that he was born in colorado, only a few months before his mother died out there of a long illness. there is something wrong about the fellow."the drawing master had come to realize that, in looking at paul, one saw only his white teeth and the forced animation of his eyes. one warm afternoon the boy had gone to sleep at his drawing board, and his master had noted with amazement what a white, blue-veined face it was; drawn and wrinkled like an old man's about the eyes, the lips twitching even in his sleep, and stiff with a nervous tension that drew them back from his teeth.his teachers left the building dissatisfied and unhappy; humiliated to have felt so vindictive toward a mere boy, to have uttered this feeling in cutting terms, and to have set each other on, as it were, in the gruesome game of intemperate reproach. some of them remembered having seen a miserable street cat set at bay by a ring of tormentors.as for paul, he ran down the hill whistling the "soldiers' chorus" from faust, looking wildly behind him now and then to see whether some of his teachers were not there to writhe under his lightheartedness. as it was now late in the afternoon and paul was on duty that evening as usher at carnegie hall, he decided that he would not go home to supper. when he reached the concert hall the doors were not yet open and, as it was chilly outside, he decided to go up into the picture gallery--always deserted at this hour--where there were some of raffelli's gay studies of paris streets and an airy blue venetian scene or two that always exhilarated him. he was delighted to find no one in the gallery but the old guard, who sat in one corner, a newspaper on his knee, a black patch over one eye and the other closed. paul possessed himself of the peace and walked confidently up and down, whistling under his breath. after a while he sat down before a blue rico and lost himself. when he bethought him to look at his watch, it was after seven o'clock, and he rose with a start and ran downstairs, making a face at augustus, peering out from the cast room, and an evil gesture at the venus de milo as he passed her on the stairway.when paul reached the ushers' dressing room half a dozen boys were there already, and he began excitedly to tumble into his uniform. it was one of the few that at all approached fitting, and paul thought it very becoming-though he knew that the tight, straight coat accentuated his narrow chest, about which he was exceedingly sensitive. he was always considerably excited while be dressed, twanging all over to the tuning of the strings and the preliminary flourishes of the horns in the music room; but tonight he seemed quite beside himself, and he teased and plagued the boys until, telling him that he was crazy, they put him down on the floor and sat on him.somewhat calmed by his suppression, paul dashed out to the front of the house to seat the early comers. he was a model usher; gracious and smiling he ran up and down the aisles; nothing was too much trouble for him; he carried messages and brought programs as though it were his greatest pleasure in life, and all the people in his section thought him a charming boy, feeling that he remembered and admired them. as the house filled, he grew more and more vivacious and animated, and the color came to his cheeks and lips. it was very much as though this were a great reception and paul were the host. just as the musicians came out to take their places, his english teacher arrived with checks for the seats which a prominent manufacturer had taken for the season. she betrayed some embarrassment when she handed paul the tickets, and a hauteur which subsequently made her feel very foolish. paul was startled for a moment, and had the feeling of wanting to put her out; what business had she here among all these fine people and gay colors? he looked her over and decided that she was not appropriately dressed and must be a fool to sit downstairs in such togs. the tickets had probably been sent her out of kindness, he reflected as he put down a seat for her, and she had about as much right to sit there as he had.when the symphony began paul sank into one of the rear seats with a long sigh of relief, and lost himself as he had done before the rico. it was not that symphonies, as such, meant anything in particular to paul, but the first sigh of the instruments seemed to free some hilarious and potent spirit within him; something that struggled there like the genie in the bottle found by the arab fisherman. he felt a sudden zest of life; the lights danced before his eyes and the concert hall blazed into unimaginable splendor. when the soprano soloist came on paul forgot even the nastiness of his teacher's being there and gave himself up to the peculiar stimulus such personages always had for him. the soloist chanced to be a german woman, by no means in her first youth, and the mother of many children; but she wore an elaborate gown and a tiara, and above all she had that indefinable air of achievement, that world-shine upon her, which, in paul's eyes, made her a veritable queen of romance.after a concert was over paul was always irritable and wretched until he got to sleep, and tonight he was even more than usually restless. he had the feeling of not being able to let down, of its being impossible to give up this delicious excitement which was the only thing that could be called living at all. during the last number he withdrew and, after hastily changing his clothes in the dressing room, slipped out to the side door where the soprano's carriage stood. here he began pacing rapidly up and down the walk, waiting to see her come out.over yonder, the schenley, in its vacant stretch, loomed big and square through the fine rain, the windows of its twelve stories glowing like those of a lighted cardboard house under a christmas tree. all the actors and singers of the better class stayed there when they were in the city, and a number of the big manufacturers of the place lived there in the winter. paul had often hung about the hotel, watching the people go in and out, longing to enter and leave schoolmasters and dull care behind him forever.at last the singer came out, accompanied by the conductor, who helped her into her carriage and closed the door with a cordial auf wiedersehen which set paul to wondering whether she were not an old sweetheart of his. paul followed the carriage over to the hotel, walking so rapidly as not to be far from the entrance when the singer alighted, and disappeared behind the swinging glass doors that were opened by a negro in a tall hat and a long coat. in the moment that the door was ajar it seemed to paul that he, too, entered. he seemed to feel himself go after her up the steps, into the warm, lighted building, into an exotic, tropical world of shiny, glistening surfaces and basking ease. he reflected upon the mysterious dishes that were brought into the dining room, the green bottles in buckets of ice, as he had seen them in the supper party pictures of the sunday world supplement. a quick gust of wind brought the rain down with sudden vehemence, and paul was startled to find that he was still outside in the slush of the gravel driveway; that his boots were letting in the water and his scanty overcoat was clinging wet about him; that the lights in front of the concert hall were out and that the rain was driving in sheets between him and the orange glow of the windows above him. there it was, what be wanted--tangibly before him, like the fairy world of a christmas pantomime--but mocking spirits stood guard at the doors, and, as the rain beat in his face, paul wondered whether he were destined always to shiver in the black night outside, looking up at it.he turned and walked reluctantly toward the car tracks. the end had to come sometime; his father in his nightclothes at the top of the stairs, explanations that did not explain, hastily improvised fictions that were forever tripping him up, his upstairs room and its horrible yellow wallpaper, the creaking bureau with the greasy plush collarbox, and over his painted wooden bed the pictures of george washington and john calvin, and the framed motto, "feed my lambs," which had been worked in red worsted by his mother.half an hour later paul alighted from his car and went slowly down one of the side streets off the main thoroughfare. it was a highly respectable street, where all the houses were exactly alike, and where businessmen of moderate means begot and reared large families of children, all of whom went to sabbath school and learned the shorter catechism, and were interested in arithmetic; all of whom were as exactly alike as their homes, and of a piece with the monotony in which they lived. paul never went up cordelia street without a shudder of loathing. his home was next to the house of the cumberland minister. he approached it tonight with the nerveless sense of defeat, the hopeless feeling of sinking back forever into ugliness and commonness that he had always had when he came home. the moment he turned into cordelia street he felt the waters close above his head. after each of these orgies of living he experienced all the physical depression which follows a debauch; the loathing of respectable beds, of common food, of a house penetrated by kitchen odors; a shuddering repulsion for the flavorless, colorless mass of everyday existence; a morbid desire for cool things and soft lights and fresh flowers.the nearer he approached the house, the more absolutely unequal paul felt to the sight of it all: his ugly sleeping chamber; the cold bathroom with the grimy zinc tub, the cracked mirror, the dripping spiggots; his father, at the top of the stairs, his hairy legs sticking out from his nightshirt, his feet thrust into carpet slippers. he was so much later than usual that there would certainly be inquiries and reproaches. paul stopped short before the door. he felt that he could not be accosted by his father tonight; that he could not toss again on that miserable bed. he would not go in. he would tell his father that he had no carfare and it was raining so hard he had gone home with one of the boys and stayed all night.meanwhile, he was wet and cold. he went around to the back of the house and tried one of the basement windows, found it open, raised it cautiously, and scrambled down the cellar wall to the floor. there he stood, holding his breath, terrified by the noise he had made, but the floor above him was silent, and there was no creak on the stairs. he found a soapbox, and carried it over to the soft ring of light that streamed from the furnace door, and sat down. he was horribly afraid of rats, so he did not try to sleep, but sat looking distrustfully at the dark, still terrified lest he might have awakened his father. in such reactions, after one of the experiences which made days and nights out of the dreary blanks of the calendar, when his senses were deadened, paul's head was always singularly clear. suppose his father had heard him getting in at the window and had come down and shot him for a burglar? then, again, suppose his father had come down, pistol in hand, and he had cried out in time to save himself, and his father had been horrified to think how nearly he had killed him? then, again, suppose a day should come when his father would remember that night, and wish there had been no warning cry to stay his hand? with this last supposition paul entertained himself until daybreak.the following sunday was fine; the sodden november chill was broken by the last flash of autumnal summer. in the morning paul had to go to church and sabbath school, as always. on seasonable sunday afternoons the burghers of cordelia street always sat out on their front stoops and talked to their neighbors on the next stoop, or called to those across the street in neighborly fashion. the men usually sat on gay cushions placed upon the steps that led down to the sidewalk, while the women, in their sunday "waists," sat in rockers on the cramped porches, pretending to be greatly at their ease. the children played in the streets; there were so many of them that the place resembled the recreation grounds of a kindergarten. the men on the steps--all in their shirt sleeves, their vests unbuttoned--sat with their legs well apart, their stomachs comfortably protruding, and talked of the prices of things, or told anecdotes of the sagacity of their various chiefs and overlords. they occasionally looked over the multitude of squabbling children, listened affectionately to their high-pitched, nasal voices, smiling to see their own proclivities reproduced in their offspring, and interspersed their legends of the iron kings with remarks about their sons' progress at school, their grades in arithmetic, and the amounts they had saved in their toy banks.on this last sunday of november paul sat all the afternoon on the lowest step of his stoop, staring into the street, while his sisters, in their rockers, were talking to the minister's daughters next door about how many shirtwaists they had made in the last week, and bow many waffles someone had eaten at the last church supper. when the weather was warm, and his father was in a particularly jovial frame of mind, the girls made lemonade, which was always brought out in a red-glass pitcher, ornamented with forget-me-nots in blue enamel. this the girls thought very fine, and the neighbors always joked about the suspicious color of the pitcher.today paul's father sat on the top step, talking to a young man who shifted a restless baby from knee to knee. he happened to be the young man who was daily held up to paul as a model, and after whom it was his father's dearest hope that he would pattern. this young man was of a ruddy complexion, with a compressed, red mouth, and faded, nearsighted eyes, over which he wore thick spectacles, with gold bows that curved about his ears. he was clerk to one of the magnates of a great steel corporation, and was looked upon in cordelia street as a young man with a future. there was a story that, some five years ago--he was now barely twenty-six--he had been a trifle dissipated, but in order to curb his appetites and save the loss of time and strength that a sowing of wild oats might have entailed, he had taken his chief's advice, oft reiterated to his employees, and at twenty- one had married the first woman whom he could persuade to share his fortunes. she happened to be an angular schoolmistress, much older than he, who also wore thick glasses, and who had now borne him four children, all nearsighted, like herself.the young man was relating how his chief, now cruising in the mediterranean, kept in touch with all the details of the business, arranging his office hours on his yacht just as though he were at home, and "knocking off work enough to keep two stenographers busy." his father told, in turn, the plan his corporation was considering, of putting in an electric railway plant in cairo. paul snapped his teeth; he had an awful apprehension that they might spoil it all before he got there. yet he rather liked to hear these legends of the iron kings that were told and retold on sundays and holidays; these stories of palaces in venice, yachts on the mediterranean, and high play at monte carlo appealed to his fancy, and he was interested in the triumphs of these cash boys who had become famous, though he had no mind for the cash-boy stage.after supper was over and he had helped to dry the dishes, paul nervously asked his father whether he could go to george's to get some help in his geometry, and still more nervously asked for carfare. this latter request he had to repeat, as his father, on principle, did not like to hear requests for money, whether much or little. he asked paul whether he could not go to some boy who lived nearer, and told him that he ought not to leave his schoolwork until sunday; but he gave him the dime. he was not a poor man, but he had a worthy ambition to come up in the world. his only reason for allowing paul to usher was that he thought a boy ought to be earning a little.paul bounded upstairs, scrubbed the greasy odor of the dishwater from his hands with the ill-smelling soap he hated, and then shook over his fingers a few drops of violet water from the bottle he kept hidden in his drawer. he left the house with his geometry conspicuously under his arm, and the moment he got out of cordelia street and boarded a downtown car, he shook off the lethargy of two deadening days and began to live again.the leading juvenile of the permanent stock company which played at one of the downtown theaters was an acquaintance of paul's, and the boy had been invited to drop in at the sunday-night rehearsals whenever he could. for more than a year paul had spent every available moment loitering about charley edwards's dressing room. he had won a place among edwards's following not only because the young actor, who could not afford to employ a dresser, often found him useful, but because he recognized in paul something akin to what churchmen term "vocation."it was at the theater and at carnegie hall that paul really lived; the rest was but a sleep and a forgetting. this was paul's fairy tale, and it had for him all the allurement of a secret love. the moment he inhaled the gassy, painty, dusty odor behind the scenes, he breathed like a prisoner set free, and felt within him the possibility of doing or saying splendid, brilliant, poetic things. the moment the cracked orchestra beat out the overture from martha, or jerked at the serenade from rigoletto, all stupid and ugly things slid from him, and his senses were deliciously, yet delicately fired.perhaps it was because, in paul's world, the natural nearly always wore the guise of ugliness, that a certain element of artificiality seemed to him necessary in beauty. perhaps it was because his experience of life elsewhere was so full of sabbath- school picnics, petty economies, wholesome advice as to how to succeed in life, and the inescapable odors of cooking, that he found this existence so alluring, these smartly clad men and women so attractive, that he was so moved by these starry apple orchards that bloomed perennially under the limelight.it would be difficult to put it strongly enough how convincingly the stage entrance of that theater was for paul the actual portal of romance. certainly none of the company ever suspected it, least of all charley edwards. it was very like the old stories that used to float about london of fabulously rich jews, who had subterranean halls there, with palms, and fountains, and soft lamps and richly appareled women who never saw the disenchanting light of london day. so, in the midst of that smoke-palled city, enamored of figures and grimy toil, paul had his secret temple, his wishing carpet, his bit of blue-and- white mediterranean shore bathed in perpetual sunshine.several of paul's teachers had a theory that his imagination had been perverted by garish fiction, but the truth was that he scarcely ever read at all. the books at home were not such as would either tempt or corrupt a youthful mind, and as for reading the novels that some of his friends urged upon him--well, he got what he wanted much more quickly from music; any sort of music, from an orchestra to a barrel organ. he needed only the spark, the indescribable thrill that made his imagination master of his senses, and he could make plots and pictures enough of his own. it was equally true that he was not stagestruck-not, at any rate, in the usual acceptation of that expression. he had no desire to become an actor, any more than he had to become a musician. he felt no necessity to do any of these things; what he wanted was to see, to be in the atmosphere, float on the wave of it, to be carried out, blue league after blue league, away from everything.after a night behind the scenes paul found the schoolroom more than ever repulsive; the bare floors and naked walls; the prosy men who never wore frock coats, or violets in their buttonholes; the women with their dull gowns, shrill voices, and pitiful seriousness about prepositions that govern the dative. he could not bear to have the other pupils think, for a moment, that he took these people seriously; he must convey to them that he considered it all trivial, and was there only by way of a jest, anyway. he had autographed pictures of all the members of the stock company which he showed his classmates, telling them the most incredible stories of his familiarity with these people, of his acquaintance with the soloists who came to carnegie hall, his suppers with them and the flowers he sent them. when these stories lost their effect, and his audience grew listless, he became desperate and would bid all the boys good-by, announcing that he was going to travel for a while; going to naples, to venice, to egypt. then, next monday, he would slip back, conscious and nervously smiling; his sister was ill, and he should have to defer his voyage until spring.matters went steadily worse with paul at school. in the itch to let his instructors know how heartily he despised them and their homilies, and how thoroughly he was appreciated elsewhere, he mentioned once or twice that he had no time to fool with theorems; adding--with a twitch of the eyebrows and a touch of that nervous bravado which so perplexed them--that he was helping the people down at the stock company; they were old friends of his.the upshot of the matter was that the principal went to paul's father, and paul was taken out of school and put to work. the manager at carnegie hall was told to get another usher in his stead; the doorkeeper at the theater was warned not to admit him to the house; and charley edwards remorsefully promised the boy's father not to see him again.the members of the stock company were vastly amused when some of paul's stories reached them--especially the women. they were hardworking women, most of them supporting indigent husbands or brothers, and they laughed rather bitterly at having stirred the boy to such fervid and florid inventions. they agreed with the faculty and with his father that paul's was a bad case.the eastbound train was plowing through a january snowstorm; the dull dawn was beginning to show gray when the engine whistled a mile out of newark. paul started up from the seat where he had lain curled in uneasy slumber, rubbed the breath-misted window glass with his hand, and peered out. the snow was whirling in curling eddies above the white bottom lands, and the drifts lay already deep in the fields and along the fences, while here and there the long dead grass and dried weed stalks protruded black above it. lights shone from the scattered houses, and a gang of laborers who stood beside the track waved their lanterns.paul had slept very little, and he felt grimy and uncomfortable. he had made the all-night journey in a day coach, partly because he was ashamed, dressed as he was, to go into a pullman, and partly because he was afraid of being seen there by some pittsburgh businessman, who might have noticed him in denny & carson's office. when the whistle awoke him, he clutched quickly at his breast pocket, glancing about him with an uncertain smile. but the little, clay-bespattered italians were still sleeping, the slatternly women across the aisle were in open-mouthed oblivion, and even the crumby, crying babies were for the nonce stilled. paul settled back to struggle with his impatience as best he could.when he arrived at the jersey city station he hurried through his breakfast, manifestly ill at ease and keeping a sharp eye about him. after he reached the twenty-third street station, he consulted a cabman and had himself driven to a men's-furnishings establishment that was just opening for the day. he spent upward of two hours there, buying with endless reconsidering and great care. his new street suit he put on in the fitting room; the frock coat and dress clothes he had bundled into the cab with his linen. then he drove to a hatter's and a shoe house. his next errand was at tiffany's, where he selected his silver and a new scarf pin. he would not wait to have his silver marked, he said. lastly, he stopped at a trunk shop on broadway and had his purchases packed into various traveling bags.it was a little after one o'clock when he drove up to the waldorf, and after settling with the cabman, went into the office. he registered from washington; said his mother and father had been abroad, and that he had come down to await the arrival of their steamer. he told his story plausibly and had no trouble, since he volunteered to pay for them in advance, in engaging his rooms; a sleeping room, sitting room, and bath.not once, but a hundred times, paul had planned this entry into new york. he had gone over every detail of it with charley edwards, and in his scrapbook at home there were pages of description about new york hotels, cut from the sunday papers. when he was shown to his sitting room on the eighth floor he saw at a glance that everything was as it should be; there was but one detail in his mental picture that the place did not realize, so he rang for the bellboy and sent him down for flowers. he moved about nervously until the boy returned, putting away his new linen and fingering it delightedly as he did so. when the flowers came he put them hastily into water, and then tumbled into a hot bath. presently he came out of his white bathroom, resplendent in his new silk underwear, and playing with the tassels of his red robe. the snow was whirling so fiercely outside his windows that he could scarcely see across the street, but within the air was deliciously soft and fragrant. he put the violets and jonquils on the taboret beside the couch, and threw himself down, with a long sigh, covering himself with a roman blanket. he was thoroughly tired; he had been in such haste, he had stood up to such a strain, covered so much ground in the last twenty-four hours, that he wanted to think how it had all come about. lulled by the sound of the wind, the warm air, and the cool fragrance of the flowers, he sank into deep, drowsy retrospection.it had been wonderfully simple; when they had shut him out of the theater and concert hall, when they had taken away his bone, the whole thing was virtually determined. the rest was a mere matter of opportunity. the only thing that at all surprised him was his own courage-for he realized well enough that he had always been tormented by fear, a sort of apprehensive dread that, of late years, as the meshes of the lies he had told closed about him, had been pulling the muscles of his body tighter and tighter. until now he could not remember the time when he had not been dreading something. even when he was a little boy it was always there--behind him, or before, or on either side. there had always been the shadowed corner, the dark place into which he dared not look, but from which something seemed always to be watching him--and paul had done things that were not pretty to watch, he knew.but now he had a curious sense of relief, as though he had at last thrown down the gauntlet to the thing in the corner.yet it was but a day since he had been sulking in the traces; but yesterday afternoon that he had been sent to the bank with denny & carson's deposit, as usual--but this time he was instructed to leave the book to be balanced. there was above two thousand dollars in checks, and nearly a thousand in the bank notes which he had taken from the book and quietly transferred to his pocket. at the bank he had made out a new deposit slip. his nerves had been steady enough to permit of his returning to the office, where he had finished his work and asked for a full day's holiday tomorrow, saturday, giving a perfectly reasonable pretext. the bankbook, he knew, would not be returned before monday or tuesday, and his father would be out of town for the next week. from the time he slipped the bank notes into his pocket until he boarded the night train for new york, he had not known a moment's hesitation. it was not the first time paul had steered through treacherous waters.how astonishingly easy it had all been; here he was, the thing done; and this time there would be no awakening, no figure at the top of the stairs. he watched the snowflakes whirling by his window until he fell asleep.when he awoke, it was three o'clock in the afternoon. he bounded up with a start; half of one of his precious days gone already! he spent more than an hour in dressing, watching every stage of his toilet carefully in the mirror. everything was quite perfect; he was exactly the kind of boy he had always wanted to be.when he went downstairs paul took a carriage and drove up fifth avenue toward the park. the snow had somewhat abated; carriages and tradesmen's wagons were hurrying soundlessly to and fro in the winter twilight; boys in woolen mufflers were shoveling off the doorsteps; the avenue stages made fine spots of color against the white street. here and there on the corners were stands, with whole flower gardens blooming under glass cases, against the sides of which the snowflakes stuck and melted; violets, roses, carnations, lilies of the valley--somehow vastly more lovely and alluring that they blossomed thus unnaturally in the snow. the park itself was a wonderful stage winterpiece.when he returned, the pause of the twilight had ceased and the tune of the streets had changed. the snow was falling faster, lights streamed from the hotels that reared their dozen stories fearlessly up into the storm, defying the raging atlantic winds. a long, black stream of carriages poured down the avenue, intersected here and there by other streams, tending horizontally. there were a score of cabs about the entrance of his hotel, and his driver had to wait. boys in livery were running in and out of the awning stretched across the sidewalk, up and down the red velvet carpet laid from the door to the street. above, about, within it all was the rumble and roar, the hurry and toss of thousands of human beings as hot for pleasure as himself, and on every side of him towered the glaring affirmation of the omnipotence of wealth.the boy set his teeth and drew his shoulders together in a spasm of realization; the plot of all dramas, the text of all romances, the nerve-stuff of all sensations was whirling about him like the snowflakes. he burnt like a faggot in a tempest.when paul went down to dinner the music of the orchestra came floating up the elevator shaft to greet him. his head whirled as he stepped into the thronged corridor, and he sank back into one of the chairs against the wall to get his breath. the lights, the chatter, the perfumes, the bewildering medley of color--he had, for a moment, the feeling of not being able to stand it. but only for a moment; these were his own people, he told himself. he went slowly about the corridors, through the writing rooms, smoking rooms, reception rooms, as though he were exploring the chambers of an enchanted palace, built and peopled for him alone.when he reached the dining room he sat down at a table near a window. the flowers, the white linen, the many-colored wineglasses, the gay toilettes of the women, the low popping of corks, the undulating repetitions of the blue danube from the orchestra, all flooded paul's dream with bewildering radiance. when the roseate tinge of his champagne was added--that cold, precious, bubbling stuff that creamed and foamed in his glass-- paul wondered that there were honest men in the world at all. this was what all the world was fighting for, he reflected; this was what all the struggle was about. he doubted the reality of his past. had he ever known a place called cordelia street, a place where fagged-looking businessmen got on the early car; mere rivets in a machine they seemed to paul,--sickening men, with combings of children's hair always hanging to their coats, and the smell of cooking in their clothes. cordelia street--ah, that belonged to another time and country; had he not always been thus, had he not sat here night after night, from as far back as he could remember, looking pensively over just such shimmering textures and slowly twirling the stem of a glass like this one between his thumb and middle finger? he rather thought he had.he was not in the least abashed or lonely. he had no especial desire to meet or to know any of these people; all he demanded was the right to look on and conjecture, to watch the pageant. the mere stage properties were all he contended for. nor was he lonely later in the evening, in his lodge at the metropolitan. he was now entirely rid of his nervous misgivings, of his forced aggressiveness, of the imperative desire to show himself different from his surroundings. he felt now that his surroundings explained him. nobody questioned the purple; he had only to wear it passively. he had only to glance down at his attire to reassure himself that here it would be impossible for anyone to humiliate him.he found it hard to leave his beautiful sitting room to go to bed that night, and sat long watching the raging storm from his turret window. when he went to sleep it was with the lights turned on in his bedroom; partly because of his old timidity, and partly so that, if he should wake in the night, there would be no wretched moment of doubt, no horrible suspicion of yellow wallpaper, or of washington and calvin above his bed.sunday morning the city was practically snowbound. paul breakfasted late, and in the afternoon he fell in with a wild san francisco boy, a freshman at yale, who said he had run down for a "little flyer" over sunday. the young man offered to show paul the night side of the town, and the two boys went out together after dinner, not returning to the hotel until seven o'clock the next morning. they had started out in the confiding warmth of a champagne friendship, but their parting in the elevator was singularly cool. the freshman pulled himself together to make his train, and paul went to bed. he awoke at two o'clock in the afternoon, very thirsty and dizzy, and rang for icewater, coffee, and the pittsburgh papers.on the part of the hotel management, paul excited no suspicion. there was this to be said for him, that he wore his spoils with dignity and in no way made himself conspicuous. even under the glow of his wine he was never boisterous, though he found the stuff like a magician's wand for wonder-building. his chief greediness lay in his ears and eyes, and his excesses were not offensive ones. his dearest pleasures were the gray winter twilights in his sitting room; his quiet enjoyment of his flowers, his clothes, his wide divan, his cigarette, and his sense of power. he could not remember a time when he had felt so at peace with himself. the mere release from the necessity of petty lying, lying every day and every day, restored his self-respect. he had never lied for pleasure, even at school; but to be noticed and admired, to assert his difference from other cordelia street boys; and he felt a good deal more manly, more honest, even, now that he had no need for boastful pretensions, now that he could, as his actor friends used to say, "dress the part." it was characteristic that remorse did not occur to him. his golden days went by without a shadow, and he made each as perfect as he could.on the eighth day after his arrival in new york he found the whole affair exploited in the pittsburgh papers, exploited with a wealth of detail which indicated that local news of a sensational nature was at a low ebb. the firm of denny & carson announced that the boy's father had refunded the full amount of the theft and that they had no intention of prosecuting. the cumberland minister had been interviewed, and expressed his hope of yet reclaiming the motherless lad, and his sabbath-school teacher declared that she would spare no effort to that end. the rumor had reached pittsburgh that the boy had been seen in a new york hotel, and his father had gone east to find him and bring him home.paul had just come in to dress for dinner; he sank into a chair, weak to the knees, and clasped his head in his hands. it was to be worse than jail, even; the tepid waters of cordelia street were to close over him finally and forever. the gray monotony stretched before him in hopeless, unrelieved years; sabbath school, young people's meeting, the yellow-papered room, the damp dishtowels; it all rushed back upon him with a sickening vividness. he had the old feeling that the orchestra had suddenly stopped, the sinking sensation that the play was over. the sweat broke out on his face, and he sprang to his feet, looked about him with his white, conscious smile, and winked at himself in the mirror, with something of the old childish belief in miracles with which he had so often gone to class, all his lessons unlearned, paul dressed and dashed whistling down the corridor to the elevator.he had no sooner entered the dining room and caught the measure of the music than his remembrance was lightened by his old elastic power of claiming the moment, mounting with it, and finding it all-sufficient. the glare and glitter about him, the mere scenic accessories had again, and for the last time, their old potency. he would show himself that he was game, he would finish the thing splendidly. he doubted, more than ever, the existence of cordelia street, and for the first time he drank his wine recklessly. was he not, after all, one of those fortunate beings born to the purple, was he not still himself and in his own place? he drummed a nervous accompaniment to the pagliacci music and looked about him, telling himself over and over that it had paid.he reflected drowsily, to the swell of the music and the chill sweetness of his wine, that he might have done it more wisely. he might have caught an outbound steamer and been well out of their clutches before now. but the other side of the world had seemed too far away and too uncertain then; he could not have waited for it; his need had been too sharp. if he had to choose over again, he would do the same thing tomorrow. he looked affectionately about the dining room, now gilded with a soft mist. ah, it had paid indeed!paul was awakened next morning by a painful throbbing in his head and feet. he had thrown himself across the bed without undressing, and had slept with his shoes on. his limbs and hands were lead heavy, and his tongue and throat were parched and burnt. there came upon him one of those fateful attacks of clearheadedness that never occurred except when he was physically exhausted and his nerves hung loose. he lay still, closed his eyes, and let the tide of things wash over him.his father was in new york; "stopping at some joint or other," he told himself. the memory of successive summers on the front stoop fell upon him like a weight of black water. he had not a hundred dollars left; and he knew now, more than ever, that money was everything, the wall that stood between all he loathed and all he wanted. the thing was winding itself up; he had thought of that on his first glorious day in new york, and had even provided a way to snap the thread. it lay on his dressing table now; he had got it out last night when he came blindly up from dinner, but the shiny metal hurt his eyes, and he disliked the looks of it.he rose and moved about with a painful effort, succumbing now and again to attacks of nausea. it was the old depression exaggerated; all the world had become cordelia street. yet somehow he was not afraid of anything, was absolutely calm; perhaps because he had looked into the dark corner at last and knew. it was bad enough, what he saw there, but somehow not so bad as his long fear of it had been. he saw everything clearly now. he had a feeling that he had made the best of it, that he had lived the sort of life he was meant to live, and for half an hour he sat staring at the revolver. but he told himself that was not the way, so he went downstairs and took a cab to the ferry.when paul arrived in newark he got off the train and took another cab, directing the driver to follow the pennsylvania tracks out of the town. the snow lay heavy on the roadways and had drifted deep in the open fields. only here and there the dead grass or dried weed stalks projected, singularly black, above it. once well into the country, paul dismissed the carriage and walked, floundering along the tracks, his mind a medley of irrelevant things. he seemed to hold in his brain an actual picture of everything he had seen that morning. he remembered every feature of both his drivers, of the toothless old woman from whom he had bought the red flowers in his coat, the agent from whom he had got his ticket, and all of his fellow passengers on the ferry. his mind, unable to cope with vital matters near at hand, worked feverishly and deftly at sorting and grouping these images. they made for him a part of the ugliness of the world, of the ache in his head, and the bitter burning on his tongue. he stooped and put a handful of snow into his mouth as he walked, but that, too, seemed hot. when he reached a little hillside, where the tracks ran through a cut some twenty feet below him, he stopped and sat down.the carnations in his coat were drooping with the cold, he noticed, their red glory all over. it occurred to him that all the flowers he had seen in the glass cases that first night must have gone the same way, long before this. it was only one splendid breath they had, in spite of their brave mockery at the winter outside the glass; and it was a losing game in the end, it seemed, this revolt against the homilies by which the world is run. paul took one of the blossoms carefully from his coat and scooped a little hole in the snow, where he covered it up. then he dozed awhile, from his weak condition, seemingly insensible to the cold.the sound of an approaching train awoke him, and he started to his feet, remembering only his resolution, and afraid lest he should be too late. he stood watching the approaching locomotive, his teeth chattering, his lips drawn away from them in a frightened smile; once or twice he glanced nervously sidewise, as though he were being watched. when the right moment came, he jumped. as he fell, the folly of his haste occurred to him with merciless clearness, the vastness of what he had left undone. there flashed through his brain, clearer than ever before, the blue of adriatic water, the yellow of algerian sands.he felt something strike his chest, and that his body was being thrown swiftly through the air, on and on, immeasurably far and fast, while his limbs were gently relaxed. then, because the picture-making mechanism was crushed, the disturbing visions flashed into black, and paul dropped back into the immense design of things.iit was a dark autumn night. the old banker was walking up and down his study and remembering how, fifteen years before, he had given a party one autumn evening. there had been many clever men there, and there had been interesting conversations. among other things they had talked of capital punishment. the majority of the guests, among whom were many journalists and intellectual men, disapproved of the death penalty. they considered that form of punishment out of date, immoral, and unsuitable for christian states. in the opinion of some of them the death penalty ought to be replaced everywhere by imprisonment for life."i don't agree with you," said their host the banker. "i have not tried either the death penalty or imprisonment for life, but if one may judge _a priori_, the death penalty is more moral and more humane than imprisonment for life. capital punishment kills a man at once, but lifelong imprisonment kills him slowly. which executioner is the more humane, he who kills you in a few minutes or he who drags the life out of you in the course of many years?""both are equally immoral," observed one of the guests, "for they both have the same object -- to take away life. the state is not god. it has not the right to take away what it cannot restore when it wants to."among the guests was a young lawyer, a young man of five-and-twenty. when he was asked his opinion, he said:"the death sentence and the life sentence are equally immoral, but if i had to choose between the death penalty and imprisonment for life, i would certainly choose the second. to live anyhow is better than not at all."a lively discussion arose. the banker, who was younger and more nervous in those days, was suddenly carried away by excitement; he struck the table with his fist and shouted at the young man:"it's not true! i'll bet you two millions you wouldn't stay in solitary confinement for five years.""if you mean that in earnest," said the young man, "i'll take the bet, but i would stay not five but fifteen years.""fifteen? done!" cried the banker. "gentlemen, i stake two millions!""agreed! you stake your millions and i stake my freedom!" said the young man.and this wild, senseless bet was carried out! the banker, spoilt and frivolous, with millions beyond his reckoning, was delighted at the bet. at supper he made fun of the young man, and said:"think better of it, young man, while there is still time. to me two millions are a trifle, but you are losing three or four of the best years of your life. i say three or four, because you won't stay longer. don't forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary confinement is a great deal harder to bear than compulsory. the thought that you have the right to step out in liberty at any moment will poison your whole existence in prison. i am sorry for you."and now the banker, walking to and fro, remembered all this, and asked himself: "what was the object of that bet? what is the good of that man's losing fifteen years of his life and my throwing away two millions? can it prove that the death penalty is better or worse than imprisonment for life? no, no. it was all nonsensical and meaningless. on my part it was the caprice of a pampered man, and on his part simple greed for money. . . ."then he remembered what followed that evening. it was decided that the young man should spend the years of his captivity under the strictest supervision in one of the lodges in the banker's garden. it was agreed that for fifteen years he should not be free to cross the threshold of the lodge, to see human beings, to hear the human voice, or to receive letters and newspapers. he was allowed to have a musical instrument and books, and was allowed to write letters, to drink wine, and to smoke. by the terms of the agreement, the only relations he could have with the outer world were by a little window made purposely for that object. he might have anything he wanted -- books, music, wine, and so on -- in any quantity he desired by writing an order, but could only receive them through the window. the agreement provided for every detail and every trifle that would make his imprisonment strictly solitary, and bound the young man to stay there _exactly_ fifteen years, beginning from twelve o'clock of november 14, 1870, and ending at twelve o'clock of november 14, 1885. the slightest attempt on his part to break the conditions, if only two minutes before the end, released the banker from the obligation to pay him two millions.for the first year of his confinement, as far as one could judge from his brief notes, the prisoner suffered severely from loneliness and depression. the sounds of the piano could be heard continually day and night from his lodge. he refused wine and tobacco. wine, he wrote, excites the desires, and desires are the worst foes of the prisoner; and besides, nothing could be more dreary than drinking good wine and seeing no one. and tobacco spoilt the air of his room. in the first year the books he sent for were principally of a light character; novels with a complicated love plot, sensational and fantastic stories, and so on.in the second year the piano was silent in the lodge, and the prisoner asked only for the classics. in the fifth year music was audible again, and the prisoner asked for wine. those who watched him through the window said that all that year he spent doing nothing but eating and drinking and lying on his bed, frequently yawning and angrily talking to himself. he did not read books. sometimes at night he would sit down to write; he would spend hours writing, and in the morning tear up all that he had written. more than once he could be heard crying.in the second half of the sixth year the prisoner began zealously studying languages, philosophy, and history. he threw himself eagerly into these studies -- so much so that the banker had enough to do to get him the books he ordered. in the course of four years some six hundred volumes were procured at his request. it was during this period that the banker received the following letter from his prisoner:"my dear jailer, i write you these lines in six languages. show them to people who know the languages. let them read them. if they find not one mistake i implore you to fire a shot in the garden. that shot will show me that my efforts have not been thrown away. the geniuses of all ages and of all lands speak different languages, but the same flame burns in them all. oh, if you only knew what unearthly happiness my soul feels now from being able to understand them!" the prisoner's desire was fulfilled. the banker ordered two shots to be fired in the garden.then after the tenth year, the prisoner sat immovably at the table and read nothing but the gospel. it seemed strange to the banker that a man who in four years had mastered six hundred learned volumes should waste nearly a year over one thin book easy of comprehension. theology and histories of religion followed the gospels.in the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an immense quantity of books quite indiscriminately. at one time he was busy with the natural sciences, then he would ask for byron or shakespeare. there were notes in which he demanded at the same time books on chemistry, and a manual of medicine, and a novel, and some treatise on philosophy or theology. his reading suggested a man swimming in the sea among the wreckage of his ship, and trying to save his life by greedily clutching first at one spar and then at another.iithe old banker remembered all this, and thought:"to-morrow at twelve o'clock he will regain his freedom. by our agreement i ought to pay him two millions. if i do pay him, it is all over with me: i shall be utterly ruined."fifteen years before, his millions had been beyond his reckoning; now he was afraid to ask himself which were greater, his debts or his assets. desperate gambling on the stock exchange, wild speculation and the excitability which he could not get over even in advancing years, had by degrees led to the decline of his fortune and the proud, fearless, self-confident millionaire had become a banker of middling rank, trembling at every rise and fall in his investments. "cursed bet!" muttered the old man, clutching his head in despair "why didn't the man die? he is only forty now. he will take my last penny from me, he will marry, will enjoy life, will gamble on the exchange; while i shall look at him with envy like a beggar, and hear from him every day the same sentence: 'i am indebted to you for the happiness of my life, let me help you!' no, it is too much! the one means of being saved from bankruptcy and disgrace is the death of that man!"it struck three o'clock, the banker listened; everyone was asleep in the house and nothing could be heard outside but the rustling of the chilled trees. trying to make no noise, he took from a fireproof safe the key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his overcoat, and went out of the house.it was dark and cold in the garden. rain was falling. a damp cutting wind was racing about the garden, howling and giving the trees no rest. the banker strained his eyes, but could see neither the earth nor the white statues, nor the lodge, nor the trees. going to the spot where the lodge stood, he twice called the watchman. no answer followed. evidently the watchman had sought shelter from the weather, and was now asleep somewhere either in the kitchen or in the greenhouse."if i had the pluck to carry out my intention," thought the old man, "suspicion would fall first upon the watchman."he felt in the darkness for the steps and the door, and went into the entry of the lodge. then he groped his way into a little passage and lighted a match. there was not a soul there. there was a bedstead with no bedding on it, and in the corner there was a dark cast-iron stove. the seals on the door leading to the prisoner's rooms were intact.when the match went out the old man, trembling with emotion, peeped through the little window. a candle was burning dimly in the prisoner's room. he was sitting at the table. nothing could be seen but his back, the hair on his head, and his hands. open books were lying on the table, on the two easy-chairs, and on the carpet near the table.five minutes passed and the prisoner did not once stir. fifteen years' imprisonment had taught him to sit still. the banker tapped at the window with his finger, and the prisoner made no movement whatever in response. then the banker cautiously broke the seals off the door and put the key in the keyhole. the rusty lock gave a grating sound and the door creaked. the banker expected to hear at once footsteps and a cry of astonishment, but three minutes passed and it was as quiet as ever in the room. he made up his mind to go in.at the table a man unlike ordinary people was sitting motionless. he was a skeleton with the skin drawn tight over his bones, with long curls like a woman's and a shaggy beard. his face was yellow with an earthy tint in it, his cheeks were hollow, his back long and narrow, and the hand on which his shaggy head was propped was so thin and delicate that it was dreadful to look at it. his hair was already streaked with silver, and seeing his emaciated, aged-looking face, no one would have believed that he was only forty. he was asleep. . . . in front of his bowed head there lay on the table a sheet of paper on which there was something written in fine handwriting."poor creature!" thought the banker, "he is asleep and most likely dreaming of the millions. and i have only to take this half-dead man, throw him on the bed, stifle him a little with the pillow, and the most conscientious expert would find no sign of a violent death. but let us first read what he has written here. . . ."the banker took the page from the table and read as follows:"to-morrow at twelve o'clock i regain my freedom and the right to associate with other men, but before i leave this room and see the sunshine, i think it necessary to say a few words to you. with a clear conscience i tell you, as before god, who beholds me, that i despise freedom and life and health, and all that in your books is called the good things of the world."for fifteen years i have been intently studying earthly life. it is true i have not seen the earth nor men, but in your books i have drunk fragrant wine, i have sung songs, i have hunted stags and wild boars in the forests, have loved women. . . . beauties as ethereal as clouds, created by the magic of your poets and geniuses, have visited me at night, and have whispered in my ears wonderful tales that have set my brain in a whirl. in your books i have climbed to the peaks of elburz and mont blanc, and from there i have seen the sun rise and have watched it at evening flood the sky, the ocean, and the mountain-tops with gold and crimson. i have watched from there the lightning flashing over my head and cleaving the storm-clouds. i have seen green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, towns. i have heard the singing of the sirens, and the strains of the shepherds' pipes; i have touched the wings of comely devils who flew down to converse with me of god. . . . in your books i have flung myself into the bottomless pit, performed miracles, slain, burned towns, preached new religions, conquered whole kingdoms. . . ."your books have given me wisdom. all that the unresting thought of man has created in the ages is compressed into a small compass in my brain. i know that i am wiser than all of you."and i despise your books, i despise wisdom and the blessings of this world. it is all worthless, fleeting, illusory, and deceptive, like a mirage. you may be proud, wise, and fine, but death will wipe you off the face of the earth as though you were no more than mice burrowing under the floor, and your posterity, your history, your immortal geniuses will burn or freeze together with the earthly globe."you have lost your reason and taken the wrong path. you have taken lies for truth, and hideousness for beauty. you would marvel if, owing to strange events of some sorts, frogs and lizards suddenly grew on apple and orange trees instead of fruit, or if roses began to smell like a sweating horse; so i marvel at you who exchange heaven for earth. i don't want to understand you."to prove to you in action how i despise all that you live by, i renounce the two millions of which i once dreamed as of paradise and which now i despise. to deprive myself of the right to the money i shall go out from here five hours before the time fixed, and so break the compact. . . ."when the banker had read this he laid the page on the table, kissed the strange man on the head, and went out of the lodge, weeping. at no other time, even when he had lost heavily on the stock exchange, had he felt so great a contempt for himself. when he got home he lay on his bed, but his tears and emotion kept him for hours from sleeping.next morning the watchmen ran in with pale faces, and told him they had seen the man who lived in the lodge climb out of the window into the garden, go to the gate, and disappear. the banker went at once with the servants to the lodge and made sure of the flight of his prisoner. to avoid arousing unnecessary talk, he took from the table the writing in which the millions were renounced, and when he got home locked it up in the fireproof safe.olenka, the daughter of the retired collegiate assessor, plemyanniakov, was sitting in her back porch, lost in thought. it was hot, the flies were persistent and teasing, and it was pleasant to reflect that it would soon be evening. dark rainclouds were gathering from the east, and bringing from time to time a breath of moisture in the air.kukin, who was the manager of an open-air theatre called the tivoli, and who lived in the lodge, was standing in the middle of the garden looking at the sky."again!" he observed despairingly. "it's going to rain again! rain every day, as though to spite me. i might as well hang myself! it's ruin! fearful losses every day."he flung up his hands, and went on, addressing olenka:"there! that's the life we lead, olga semyonovna. it's enough to make one cry. one works and does one's utmost, one wears oneself out, getting no sleep at night, and racks one's brain what to do for the best. and then what happens? to begin with, one's public is ignorant, boorish. i give them the very best operetta, a dainty masque, first rate music-hall artists. but do you suppose that's what they want! they don't understand anything of that sort. they want a clown; what they ask for is vulgarity. and then look at the weather! almost every evening it rains. it started on the tenth of may, and it's kept it up all may and june. it's simply awful! the public doesn't come, but i've to pay the rent just the same, and pay the artists."the next evening the clouds would gather again, and kukin would say with an hysterical laugh:"well, rain away, then! flood the garden, drown me! damn my luck in this world and the next! let the artists have me up! send me to prison! -- to siberia! -- the scaffold! ha, ha, ha!"and next day the same thing.olenka listened to kukin with silent gravity, and sometimes tears came into her eyes. in the end his misfortunes touched her; she grew to love him. he was a small thin man, with a yellow face, and curls combed forward on his forehead. he spoke in a thin tenor; as he talked his mouth worked on one side, and there was always an expression of despair on his face; yet he aroused a deep and genuine affection in her. she was always fond of some one, and could not exist without loving. in earlier days she had loved her papa, who now sat in a darkened room, breathing with difficulty; she had loved her aunt who used to come every other year from bryansk; and before that, when she was at school, she had loved her french master. she was a gentle, soft-hearted, compassionate girl, with mild, tender eyes and very good health. at the sight of her full rosy cheeks, her soft white neck with a little dark mole on it, and the kind, naã¯ve smile, which came into her face when she listened to anything pleasant, men thought, "yes, not half bad," and smiled too, while lady visitors could not refrain from seizing her hand in the middle of a conversation, exclaiming in a gush of delight, "you darling!"the house in which she had lived from her birth upwards, and which was left her in her father's will, was at the extreme end of the town, not far from the tivoli. in the evenings and at night she could hear the band playing, and the crackling and banging of fireworks, and it seemed to her that it was kukin struggling with his destiny, storming the entrenchments of his chief foe, the indifferent public; there was a sweet thrill at her heart, she had no desire to sleep, and when he returned home at day-break, she tapped softly at her bedroom window, and showing him only her face and one shoulder through the curtain, she gave him a friendly smileâhe proposed to her, and they were married. and when he had a closer view of her neck and her plump, fine shoulders, he threw up his hands, and said:"you darling!"he was happy, but as it rained on the day and night of his wedding, his face still retained an expression of despair.they got on very well together. she used to sit in his office, to look after things in the tivoli, to put down the accounts and pay the wages. and her rosy cheeks, her sweet, naã¯ve, radiant smile, were to be seen now at the office window, now in the refreshment bar or behind the scenes of the theatre. and already she used to say to her acquaintances that the theatre was the chief and most important thing in life and that it was only through the drama that one could derive true enjoyment and become cultivated and humane."but do you suppose the public understands that?" she used to say. "what they want is a clown. yesterday we gave 'faust inside out,' and almost all the boxes were empty; but if vanitchka and i had been producing some vulgar thing, i assure you the theatre would have been packed. tomorrow vanitchka and i are doing 'orpheus in hell.' do come."and what kukin said about the theatre and the actors she repeated. like him she despised the public for their ignorance and their indifference to art; she took part in the rehearsals, she corrected the actors, she kept an eye on the behaviour of the musicians, and when there was an unfavourable notice in the local paper, she shed tears, and then went to the editor's office to set things right.the actors were fond of her and used to call her "vanitchka and i," and "the darling"; she was sorry for them and used to lend them small sums of money, and if they deceived her, she used to shed a few tears in private, but did not complain to her husband.they got on well in the winter too. they took the theatre in the town for the whole winter, and let it for short terms to a little russian company, or to a conjurer, or to a local dramatic society. olenka grew stouter, and was always beaming with satisfaction, while kukin grew thinner and yellower, and continually complained of their terrible losses, although he had not done badly all the winter. he used to cough at night, and she used to give him hot raspberry tea or lime-flower water, to rub him with eau-de-cologne and to wrap him in her warm shawls."you're such a sweet pet!" she used to say with perfect sincerity, stroking his hair. "you're such a pretty dear!"towards lent he went to moscow to collect a new troupe, and without him she could not sleep, but sat all night at her window, looking at the stars, and she compared herself with the hens, who are awake all night and uneasy when the cock is not in the hen-house. kukin was detained in moscow, and wrote that he would be back at easter, adding some instructions about the tivoli. but on the sunday before easter, late in the evening, came a sudden ominous knock at the gate; some one was hammering on the gate as though on a barrel -- boom, boom, boom! the drowsy cook went flopping with her bare feet through the puddles, as she ran to open the gate."please open," said some one outside in a thick bass. "there is a telegram for you."olenka had received telegrams from her husband before, but this time for some reason she felt numb with terror. with shaking hands she opened the telegram and read as follows:"ivan petrovitch died suddenly to-day. awaiting immate instructions fufuneral tuesday."that was how it was written in the telegram -- "fufuneral," and the utterly incomprehensible word "immate." it was signed by the stage manager of the operatic company."my darling!" sobbed olenka. "vanka, my precious, my darling! why did i ever meet you! why did i know you and love you! your poor heart-broken olenka is alone without you!"kukin's funeral took place on tuesday in moscow, olenka returned home on wednesday, and as soon as she got indoors, she threw herself on her bed and sobbed so loudly that it could be heard next door, and in the street."poor darling!" the neighbours said, as they crossed themselves. "olga semyonovna, poor darling! how she does take on!"three months later olenka was coming home from mass, melancholy and in deep mourning. it happened that one of her neighbours, vassily andreitch pustovalov, returning home from church, walked back beside her. he was the manager at babakayev's, the timber merchant's. he wore a straw hat, a white waistcoat, and a gold watch-chain, and looked more a country gentleman than a man in trade."everything happens as it is ordained, olga semyonovna," he said gravely, with a sympathetic note in his voice; "and if any of our dear ones die, it must be because it is the will of god, so we ought have fortitude and bear it submissively."after seeing olenka to her gate, he said good-bye and went on. all day afterwards she heard his sedately dignified voice, and whenever she shut her eyes she saw his dark beard. she liked him very much. and apparently she had made an impression on him too, for not long afterwards an elderly lady, with whom she was only slightly acquainted, came to drink coffee with her, and as soon as she was seated at table began to talk about pustovalov, saying that he was an excellent man whom one could thoroughly depend upon, and that any girl would be glad to marry him. three days later pustovalov came himself. he did not stay long, only about ten minutes, and he did not say much, but when he left, olenka loved him -- loved him so much that she lay awake all night in a perfect fever, and in the morning she sent for the elderly lady. the match was quickly arranged, and then came the wedding.pustovalov and olenka got on very well together when they were married.usually he sat in the office till dinner-time, then he went out on business, while olenka took his place, and sat in the office till evening, making up accounts and booking orders."timber gets dearer every year; the price rises twenty per cent," she would say to her customers and friends. "only fancy we used to sell local timber, and now vassitchka always has to go for wood to the mogilev district. and the freight!" she would add, covering her cheeks with her hands in horror. "the freight!"it seemed to her that she had been in the timber trade for ages and ages, and that the most important and necessary thing in life was timber; and there was something intimate and touching to her in the very sound of words such as "baulk," "post," "beam," "pole," "scantling," "batten," "lath," "plank," etc.at night when she was asleep she dreamed of perfect mountains of planks and boards, and long strings of wagons, carting timber somewhere far away. she dreamed that a whole regiment of six-inch beams forty feet high, standing on end, was marching upon the timber-yard; that logs, beams, and boards knocked together with the resounding crash of dry wood, kept falling and getting up again, piling themselves on each other. olenka cried out in her sleep, and pustovalov said to her tenderly: "olenka, what's the matter, darling? cross yourself!"her husband's ideas were hers. if he thought the room was too hot, or that business was slack, she thought the same. her husband did not care for entertainments, and on holidays he stayed at home. she did likewise."you are always at home or in the office," her friends said to her. "you should go to the theatre, darling, or to the circus.""vassitchka and i have no time to go to theatres," she would answer sedately. "we have no time for nonsense. what's the use of these theatres?"on saturdays pustovalov and she used to go to the evening service; on holidays to early mass, and they walked side by side with softened faces as they came home from church. there was a pleasant fragrance about them both, and her silk dress rustled agreeably. at home they drank tea, with fancy bread and jams of various kinds, and afterwards they ate pie. every day at twelve o'clock there was a savoury smell of beet-root soup and of mutton or duck in their yard, and on fast-days of fish, and no one could pass the gate without feeling hungry. in the office the samovar was always boiling, and customers were regaled with tea and cracknels. once a week the couple went to the baths and returned side by side, both red in the face."yes, we have nothing to complain of, thank god," olenka used to say to her acquaintances. "i wish every one were as well off as vassitchka and i."when pustovalov went away to buy wood in the mogilev district, she missed him dreadfully, lay awake and cried. a young veterinary surgeon in the army, called smirnin, to whom they had let their lodge, used sometimes to come in in the evening. he used to talk to her and play cards with her, and this entertained her in her husband's absence. she was particularly interested in what he told her of his home life. he was married and had a little boy, but was separated from his wife because she had been unfaithful to him, and now he hated her and used to send her forty roubles a month for the maintenance of their son. and hearing of all this, olenka sighed and shook her head. she was sorry for him."well, god keep you," she used to say to him at parting, as she lighted him down the stairs with a candle. "thank you for coming to cheer me up, and may the mother of god give you health."and she always expressed herself with the same sedateness and dignity, the same reasonableness, in imitation of her husband. as the veterinary surgeon was disappearing behind the door below, she would say:"you know, vladimir platonitch, you'd better make it up with your wife. you should forgive her for the sake of your son. you may be sure the little fellow understands."and when pustovalov came back, she told him in a low voice about the veterinary surgeon and his unhappy home life, and both sighed and shook their heads and talked about the boy, who, no doubt, missed his father, and by some strange connection of ideas, they went up to the holy ikons, bowed to the ground before them and prayed that god would give them children.and so the pustovalovs lived for six years quietly and peaceably in love and complete harmony.but behold! one winter day after drinking hot tea in the office, vassily andreitch went out into the yard without his cap on to see about sending off some timber, caught cold and was taken ill. he had the best doctors, but he grew worse and died after four months' illness. and olenka was a widow once more."i've nobody, now you've left me, my darling," she sobbed, after her husband's funeral. "how can i live without you, in wretchedness and misery! pity me, good people, all alone in the world!"she went about dressed in black with long "weepers," and gave up wearing hat and gloves for good. she hardly ever went out, except to church, or to her husband's grave, and led the life of a nun. it was not till six months later that she took off the weepers and opened the shutters of the windows. she was sometimes seen in the mornings, going with her cook to market for provisions, but what went on in her house and how she lived now could only be surmised. people guessed, from seeing her drinking tea in her garden with the veterinary surgeon, who read the newspaper aloud to her, and from the fact that, meeting a lady she knew at the post-office, she said to her:"there is no proper veterinary inspection in our town, and that's the cause of all sorts of epidemics. one is always hearing of people's getting infection from the milk supply, or catching diseases from horses and cows. the health of domestic animals ought to be as well cared for as the health of human beings."she repeated the veterinary surgeon's words, and was of the same opinion as he about everything. it was evident that she could not live a year without some attachment, and had found new happiness in the lodge. in any one else this would have been censured, but no one could think ill of olenka; everything she did was so natural. neither she nor the veterinary surgeon said anything to other people of the change in their relations, and tried, indeed, to conceal it, but without success, for olenka could not keep a secret. when he had visitors, men serving in his regiment, and she poured out tea or served the supper, she would begin talking of the cattle plague, of the foot and mouth disease, and of the municipal slaughterhouses. he was dreadfully embarrassed, and when the guests had gone, he would seize her by the hand and hiss angrily:"i've asked you before not to talk about what you don't understand. when we veterinary surgeons are talking among ourselves, please don't put your word in. it's really annoying."and she would look at him with astonishment and dismay, and ask him in alarm: "but, voloditchka, what am i to talk about?"and with tears in her eyes she would embrace him, begging him not to be angry, and they were both happy.but this happiness did not last long. the veterinary surgeon departed, departed for ever with his regiment, when it was transferred to a distant place -- to siberia, it may be. and olenka was left alone.now she was absolutely alone. her father had long been dead, and his armchair lay in the attic, covered with dust and lame of one leg. she got thinner and plainer, and when people met her in the street they did not look at her as they used to, and did not smile to her; evidently her best years were over and left behind, and now a new sort of life had begun for her, which did not bear thinking about. in the evening olenka sat in the porch, and heard the band playing and the fireworks popping in the tivoli, but now the sound stirred no response. she looked into her yard without interest, thought of nothing, wished for nothing, and afterwards, when night came on she went to bed and dreamed of her empty yard. she ate and drank as it were unwillingly.and what was worst of all, she had no opinions of any sort. she saw the objects about her and understood what she saw, but could not form any opinion about them, and did not know what to talk about. and how awful it is not to have any opinions! one sees a bottle, for instance, or the rain, or a peasant driving in his cart, but what the bottle is for, or the rain, or the peasant, and what is the meaning of it, one can't say, and could not even for a thousand roubles. when she had kukin, or pustovalov, or the veterinary surgeon, olenka could explain everything, and give her opinion about anything you like, but now there was the same emptiness in her brain and in her heart as there was in her yard outside. and it was as harsh and as bitter as wormwood in the mouth.little by little the town grew in all directions. the road became a street, and where the tivoli and the timber-yard had been, there were new turnings and houses. how rapidly time passes! olenka's house grew dingy, the roof got rusty, the shed sank on one side, and the whole yard was overgrown with docks and stinging-nettles. olenka herself had grown plain and elderly; in summer she sat in the porch, and her soul, as before, was empty and dreary and full of bitterness. in winter she sat at her window and looked at the snow. when she caught the scent of spring, or heard the chime of the church bells, a sudden rush of memories from the past came over her, there was a tender ache in her heart, and her eyes brimmed over with tears; but this was only for a minute, and then came emptiness again and the sense of the futility of life. the black kitten, briska, rubbed against her and purred softly, but olenka was not touched by these feline caresses. that was not what she needed. she wanted a love that would absorb her whole being, her whole soul and reason -- that would give her ideas and an object in life, and would warm her old blood. and she would shake the kitten off her skirt and say with vexation:"get along; i don't want you!"and so it was, day after day and year after year, and no joy, and no opinions. whatever mavra, the cook, said she accepted.one hot july day, towards evening, just as the cattle were being driven away, and the whole yard was full of dust, some one suddenly knocked at the gate. olenka went to open it herself and was dumbfounded when she looked out: she saw smirnin, the veterinary surgeon, grey-headed, and dressed as a civilian. she suddenly remembered everything. she could not help crying and letting her head fall on his breast without uttering a word, and in the violence of her feeling she did not notice how they both walked into the house and sat down to tea."my dear vladimir platonitch! what fate has brought you?" she muttered, trembling with joy."i want to settle here for good, olga semyonovna," he told her. "i have resigned my post, and have come to settle down and try my luck on my own account. besides, it's time for my boy to go to school. he's a big boy. i am reconciled with my wife, you know.""where is she?' asked olenka."she's at the hotel with the boy, and i'm looking for lodgings.""good gracious, my dear soul! lodgings? why not have my house? why shouldn't that suit you? why, my goodness, i wouldn't take any rent!" cried olenka in a flutter, beginning to cry again. "you live here, and the lodge will do nicely for me. oh dear! how glad i am!"next day the roof was painted and the walls were whitewashed, and olenka, with her arms akimbo walked about the yard giving directions. her face was beaming with her old smile, and she was brisk and alert as though she had waked from a long sleep. the veterinary's wife arrived -- a thin, plain lady, with short hair and a peevish expression. with her was her little sasha, a boy of ten, small for his age, blue-eyed, chubby, with dimples in his cheeks. and scarcely had the boy walked into the yard when he ran after the cat, and at once there was the sound of his gay, joyous laugh."is that your puss, auntie?" he asked olenka. "when she has little ones, do give us a kitten. mamma is awfully afraid of mice."olenka talked to him, and gave him tea. her heart warmed and there was a sweet ache in her bosom, as though the boy had been her own child. and when he sat at the table in the evening, going over his lessons, she looked at him with deep tenderness and pity as she murmured to herself:"you pretty pet! â my precious! â such a fair little thing, and so clever."" 'an island is a piece of land which is entirely surrounded by water,' " he read aloud."an island is a piece of land," she repeated, and this was the first opinion to which she gave utterance with positive conviction after so many years of silence and dearth of ideas.now she had opinions of her own, and at supper she talked to sasha's parents, saying how difficult the lessons were at the high schools, but that yet the high school was better than a commercial one, since with a high-school education all careers were open to one, such as being a doctor or an engineer.sasha began going to the high school. his mother departed to harkov to her sister's and did not return; his father used to go off every day to inspect cattle, and would often be away from home for three days together, and it seemed to olenka as though sasha was entirely abandoned, that he was not wanted at home, that he was being starved, and she carried him off to her lodge and gave him a little room there.and for six months sasha had lived in the lodge with her. every morning olenka came into his bedroom and found him fast asleep, sleeping noiselessly with his hand under his cheek. she was sorry to wake him."sashenka," she would say mournfully, "get up, darling. it's time for school."he would get up, dress and say his prayers, and then sit down to breakfast, drink three glasses of tea, and eat two large cracknels and a half a buttered roll. all this time he was hardly awake and a little ill-humoured in consequence."you don't quite know your fable, sashenka," olenka would say, looking at him as though he were about to set off on a long journey. "what a lot of trouble i have with you! you must work and do your best, darling, and obey your teachers.""oh, do leave me alone!" sasha would say.then he would go down the street to school, a little figure, wearing a big cap and carrying a satchel on his shoulder. olenka would follow him noiselessly."sashenka!" she would call after him, and she would pop into his hand a date or a caramel. when he reached the street where the school was, he would feel ashamed of being followed by a tall, stout woman, he would turn round and say:"you'd better go home, auntie. i can go the rest of the way alone."she would stand still and look after him fixedly till he had disappeared at the school-gate.ah, how she loved him! of her former attachments not one had been so deep; never had her soul surrendered to any feeling so spontaneously, so disinterestedly, and so joyously as now that her maternal instincts were aroused. for this little boy with the dimple in his cheek and the big school cap, she would have given her whole life, she would have given it with joy and tears of tenderness. why? who can tell why?when she had seen the last of sasha, she returned home, contented and serene, brimming over with love; her face, which had grown younger during the last six months, smiled and beamed; people meeting her looked at her with pleasure."good-morning, olga semyonovna, darling. how are you, darling?""the lessons at the high school are very difficult now," she would relate at the market. "it's too much; in the first class yesterday they gave him a fable to learn by heart, and a latin translation and a problem. you know it's too much for a little chap."and she would begin talking about the teachers, the lessons, and the school books, saying just what sasha said.at three o'clock they had dinner together: in the evening they learned their lessons together and cried. when she put him to bed, she would stay a long time making the cross over him and murmuring a prayer; then she would go to bed and dream of that far-away misty future when sasha would finish his studies and become a doctor or an engineer, would have a big house of his own with horses and a carriage, would get married and have children â she would fall asleep still thinking of the same thing, and tears would run down her cheeks from her closed eyes, while the black cat lay purring beside her: "mrr, mrr, mrr."suddenly there would come a loud knock at the gate.olenka would wake up breathless with alarm, her heart throbbing. half a minute later would come another knock."it must be a telegram from harkov," she would think, beginning to tremble from head to foot. "sasha's mother is sending for him from harkov.  oh, mercy on us!"she was in despair. her head, her hands, and her feet would turn chill, and she would feel that she was the most unhappy woman in the world. but another minute would pass, voices would be heard: it would turn out to be the veterinary surgeon coming home from the club."well, thank god!" she would think.and gradually the load in her heart would pass off, and she would feel at ease. she would go back to bed thinking of sasha, who lay sound asleep in the next room, sometimes crying out in his sleep:"i'll give it you! get away! shut up!"between eight and nine o'clock in the morning.a dark leaden-coloured mass is creeping over the sky towards the sun. red zigzags of lightning gleam here and there across it. there is a sound of far-away rumbling. a warm wind frolics over the grass, bends the trees, and stirs up the dust. in a minute there will be a spurt of may rain and a real storm will begin.fyokla, a little beggar-girl of six, is running through the village, looking for terenty the cobbler. the white-haired, barefoot child is pale. her eyes are wide-open, her lips are trembling."uncle, where is terenty?" she asks every one she meets. no one answers. they are all preoccupied with the approaching storm and take refuge in their huts. at last she meets silanty silitch, the sacristan, terenty's bosom friend. he is coming along, staggering from the wind."uncle, where is terenty?""at the kitchen-gardens," answers silanty.the beggar-girl runs behind the huts to the kitchen-gardens and there finds terenty; the tall old man with a thin, pock-marked face, very long legs, and bare feet, dressed in a woman's tattered jacket, is standing near the vegetable plots, looking with drowsy, drunken eyes at the dark storm-cloud. on his long crane-like legs he sways in the wind like a starling-cote."uncle terenty!" the white-headed beggar-girl addresses him. "uncle, darling!"terenty bends down to fyokla, and his grim, drunken face is overspread with a smile, such as come into people's faces when they look at something little, foolish, and absurd, but warmly loved."ah! servant of god, fyokla," he says, lisping tenderly, "where have you come from?""uncle terenty," says fyokla, with a sob, tugging at the lapel of the cobbler's coat. "brother danilka has had an accident! come along!""what sort of accident? ough, what thunder! holy, holy, holyâ. what sort of accident?""in the count's copse danilka stuck his hand into a hole in a tree, and he can't get it out. come along, uncle, do be kind and pull his hand out!""how was it he put his hand in? what for?""he wanted to get a cuckoo's egg out of the hole for me.""the day has hardly begun and already you are in troubleâ."terenty shook his head and spat deliberately. "well, what am i to do with you now? i must comeâ i must, may the wolf gobble you up, you naughty children! come, little orphan!"terenty comes out of the kitchen-garden and, lifting high his long legs, begins striding down the village street. he walks quickly without stopping or looking from side to side, as though he were shoved from behind or afraid of pursuit. fyokla can hardly keep up with him.they come out of the village and turn along the dusty road towards the count's copse that lies dark blue in the distance. it is about a mile and a half away. the clouds have by now covered the sun, and soon afterwards there is not a speck of blue left in the sky. it grows dark."holy, holy, holyâ" whispers fyokla, hurrying after terenty. the first rain-drops, big and heavy, lie, dark dots on the dusty road. a big drop falls on fyokla's cheek and glides like a tear down her chin."the rain has begun," mutters the cobbler, kicking up the dust with his bare, bony feet. "that's fine, fyokla, old girl. the grass and the trees are fed by the rain, as we are by bread. and as for the thunder, don't you be frightened, little orphan. why should it kill a little thing like you?"as soon as the rain begins, the wind drops. the only sound is the patter of rain dropping like fine shot on the young rye and the parched road."we shall get soaked, fyokla," mutters terenty. "there won't be a dry spot left on usâ.ho-ho, my girl! it's run down my neck! but don't be frightened, sillyâ.the grass will be dry again, the earth will be dry again, and we shall be dry again. there is the same sun for us all."a flash of lightning, some fourteen feet long, gleams above their head. there is a loud peal of thunder, and it seems to fyokla that something big, heavy, and round is rolling over the sky and tearing it open, exactly over her head."holy, holy, holyâ" says terenty, crossing himself. "don't be afraid, little orphan! it is not from spite that it thunders."terenty's and fyokla's feet are covered with lumps of heavy, wet clay. it is slippery and difficult to walk, but terenty strides on more and more rapidly. the weak little beggar-girl is breathless and ready to drop.but at last they go into the count's copse. the washed trees, stirred by a gust of wind, drop a perfect waterfall upon them. terenty stumbles over stumps and begins to slacken his pace."whereabouts is danilka?" he asks. "lead me to him."fyokla leads him into a thicket, and, after going a quarter of a mile, points to danilka. her brother, a little fellow of eight, with hair as red as ochre and a pale sickly face, stands leaning against a tree, and, with his head on one side, looking sideways at the sky. in one hand he holds his shabby old cap, the other is hidden in an old lime tree. the boy is gazing at the stormy sky, and apparently not thinking of his trouble. hearing footsteps and seeing the cobbler he gives sickly smile and says:"a terrible lot of thunder, terentyâ.i've never heard so much thunder in all my life.""and where is your hand?""in the holeâ.pull it out, please, terenty!"the wood had broken at the edge of the hole and jammed danilka's hand: he could push it farther in, but could not pull it out. terenty snaps off the broken piece, and the boy's hand, red and crushed, is released."it's terrible how it's thundering," the boy says again, rubbing his hand. "what makes it thunder, terenty?""one cloud runs against the other," answers the cobbler. the party come out of the copse, and walk along the edge of it towards the darkened road. the thunder gradually abates, and its rumbling is heard far away beyond the village."the ducks flew by here the other day, terenty," says danilka, still rubbing his hand. "they must be nesting in the gniliya zaimishtcha marshesâ.fyokla, would you like me to show you a nightingale's nest?""don't touch it, you might disturb them," says terenty, wringing the water out of his cap. "the nightingale is a singing-bird, without sin. he has had a voice given him in his throat, to praise god and gladden the heart of man. it's a sin to disturb him.""what about the sparrow?""the sparrow doesn't matter, he's a bad, spiteful bird. he is like a pickpocket in his ways. he doesn't like man to be happy. when christ was crucified it was the sparrow brought nails to the jews, and called 'alive! alive!' "a bright patch of blue appears in the sky."look!" says terenty. "an ant-heap burst open by the rain! they've been flooded, the rogues!"they bend over the ant-heap. the downpour has damaged it; the insects are scurrying to and fro in the mud, agitated, and busily trying to carry away their drowned companions."you needn't be in such a taking, you won't die of it!" says terenty, grinning. "as soon as the sun warms you, you'll come to your senses againâ.it's a lesson to you, you stupids. you won't settle on low ground another time."they go on."and here are some bees," cries danilka, pointing to the branch of a young oak tree.the drenched and chilled bees are huddled together on the branch. there are so many of them that neither bark nor leaf can be seen. many of them are settled on one another."that's a swarm of bees," terenty informs them. "they were flying looking for a home, and when the rain came down upon them they settled. if a swarm is flying, you need only sprinkle water on them to make them settle. now if, say, you wanted to take the swarm, you would bend the branch with them into a sack and shake it, and they all fall in."little fyokla suddenly frowns and rubs her neck vigorously. her brother looks at her neck, and sees a big swelling on it."hey-hey!" laughs the cobbler. "do you know where you got that from, fyokla, old girl? there are spanish flies on some tree in the wood. the rain has trickled off them, and a drop has fallen on your neckâthat's what has made the swelling."the sun appears from behind the clouds and floods the wood, the fields, and the three friends with its warm light. the dark menacing cloud has gone far away and taken the storm with it. the air is warm and fragrant. there is a scent of bird-cherry, meadowsweet, and lilies-of-the-valley."that herb is given when your nose bleeds," says terenty, pointing to a woolly-looking flower. "it does good."they hear a whistle and a rumble, but not such a rumble as the storm-clouds carried away. a goods train races by before the eyes of terenty, danilka, and fyokla. the engine, panting and puffing out black smoke, drags more than twenty vans after it. its power is tremendous. the children are interested to know how an engine, not alive and without the help of horses, can move and drag such weights, and terenty undertakes to explain it to them:"it's all the steam's doing, childrenâ. the steam does the workâ. you see, it shoves under that thing near the wheels, and itâyou seeâit worksâ"they cross the railway line, and, going down from the embankment, walk towards the river. they walk not with any object, but just at random, and talk all the wayâ. danilka asks questions, terenty answers themâterenty answers all his questions, and there is no secret in nature which baffles him. he knows everything. thus, for example, he knows the names of all the wild flowers, animals, and stones. he knows what herbs cure diseases, he has no difficulty in telling the age of a horse or a cow. looking at the sunset, at the moon, or the birds, he can tell what sort of weather it will be next day. and indeed, it is not only terenty who is so wise. silanty silitch, the innkeeper, the market-gardener, the shepherd, and all the villagers, generally speaking, know as much as he does. these people have learned not from books, but in the fields, in the wood, on the river bank. their teachers have been the birds themselves, when they sang to them, the sun when it left a glow of crimson behind it at setting, the very trees, and wild herbs.danilka looks at terenty and greedily drinks in every word. in spring, before one is weary of the warmth and the monotonous green of the fields, when everything is fresh and full of fragrance, who would not want to hear about the golden may-beetles, about the cranes, about the gurgling streams, and the corn mounting into ear?the two of them, the cobbler and the orphan, walk about the fields, talk unceasingly, and are not weary. they could wander about the world endlessly. they walk, and in their talk of the beauty of the earth do not notice the frail little beggar-girl tripping after them. she is breathless and moves with a lagging step. there are tears in her eyes; she would be glad to stop these inexhaustible wanderers, but to whom and where can she go? she has no home or people of her own; whether she likes it or not, she must walk and listen to their talk.towards midday, all three sit down on the river bank. danilka takes out of his bag a piece of bread, soaked and reduced to a mash, and they begin to eat. terenty says a prayer when he has eaten the bread, then stretches himself on the sandy bank and falls asleep. while he is asleep, the boy gazes at the water, pondering. he has many different things to think of. he has just seen the storm, the bees, the ants, the train. now, before his eyes, fishes are whisking about. some are two inches long and more, others are no bigger than one's nail. a viper, with its head held high, is swimming from one bank to the other.only towards the evening our wanderers return to the village. the children go for the night to a deserted barn, where the corn of the commune used to be kept, while terenty, leaving them, goes to the tavern. the children lie huddled together on the straw, dozing.the boy does not sleep. he gazes into the darkness, and it seems to him that he is seeing all that he has seen in the day: the storm-clouds, the bright sunshine, the birds, the fish, lanky terenty. the number of his impressions, together with exhaustion and hunger, are too much for him; he is as hot as though he were on fire, and tosses from side to side. he longs to tell someone all that is haunting him now in the darkness and agitating his soul, but there is no one to tell. fyokla is too little and could not understand."i'll tell terenty to-morrow," thinks the boy.the children fall asleep thinking of the homeless cobbler, and, in the night, terenty comes to them, makes the sign of the cross over them, and puts bread under their heads. and no one sees his love. it is seen only by the moon which floats in the sky and peeps caressingly through the holes in the wall of the deserted barn.ivan dmitritch, a middle-class man who lived with his family on an income of twelve hundred a year and was very well satisfied with his lot, sat down on the sofa after supper and began reading the newspaper."i forgot to look at the newspaper today," his wife said to him as she cleared the table. "look and see whether the list of drawings is there.""yes, it is," said ivan dmitritch; "but hasn't your ticket lapsed?""no; i took the interest on tuesday.""what is the number?""series 9,499, number 26.""all right . . . we will look . . . 9,499 and 26."ivan dmitritch had no faith in lottery luck, and would not, as a rule, have consented to look at the lists of winning numbers, but now, as he had nothing else to do and as the newspaper was before his eyes, he passed his finger downwards along the column of numbers. and immediately, as though in mockery of his scepticism, no further than the second line from the top, his eye was caught by the figure 9,499! unable to believe his eyes, he hurriedly dropped the paper on his knees without looking to see the number of the ticket, and, just as though some one had given him a douche of cold water, he felt an agreeable chill in the pit of the stomach; tingling and terrible and sweet!"masha, 9,499 is there!" he said in a hollow voice.his wife looked at his astonished and panicstricken face, and realized that he was not joking."9,499?" she asked, turning pale and dropping the folded tablecloth on the table."yes, yes . . . it really is there!""and the number of the ticket?""oh yes! there's the number of the ticket too. but stay . . . wait! no, i say! anyway, the number of our series is there! anyway, you understand...."looking at his wife, ivan dmitritch gave a broad, senseless smile, like a baby when a bright object is shown it. his wife smiled too; it was as pleasant to her as to him that he only mentioned the series, and did not try to find out the number of the winning ticket. to torment and tantalize oneself with hopes of possible fortune is so sweet, so thrilling!"it is our series," said ivan dmitritch, after a long silence. "so there is a probability that we have won. it's only a probability, but there it is!""well, now look!""wait a little. we have plenty of time to be disappointed. it's on the second line from the top, so the prize is seventy-five thousand. that's not money, but power, capital! and in a minute i shall look at the list, and there--26! eh? i say, what if we really have won?"the husband and wife began laughing and staring at one another in silence. the possibility of winning bewildered them; they could not have said, could not have dreamed, what they both needed that seventy-five thousand for, what they would buy, where they would go. they thought only of the figures 9,499 and 75,000 and pictured them in their imagination, while somehow they could not think of the happiness itself which was so possible.ivan dmitritch, holding the paper in his hand, walked several times from corner to corner, and only when he had recovered from the first impression began dreaming a little."and if we have won," he said--"why, it will be a new life, it will be a transformation! the ticket is yours, but if it were mine i should, first of all, of course, spend twenty-five thousand on real property in the shape of an estate; ten thousand on immediate expenses, new furnishing . . . travelling . . . paying debts, and so on. . . . the other forty thousand i would put in the bank and get interest on it.""yes, an estate, that would be nice," said his wife, sitting down and dropping her hands in her lap."somewhere in the tula or oryol provinces. . . . in the first place we shouldn't need a summer villa, and besides, it would always bring in an income."and pictures came crowding on his imagination, each more gracious and poetical than the last. and in all these pictures he saw himself well-fed, serene, healthy, felt warm, even hot! here, after eating a summer soup, cold as ice, he lay on his back on the burning sand close to a stream or in the garden under a lime-tree. . . . it is hot. . . . his little boy and girl are crawling about near him, digging in the sand or catching ladybirds in the grass. he dozes sweetly, thinking of nothing, and feeling all over that he need not go to the office today, tomorrow, or the day after. or, tired of lying still, he goes to the hayfield, or to the forest for mushrooms, or watches the peasants catching fish with a net. when the sun sets he takes a towel and soap and saunters to the bathing shed, where he undresses at his leisure, slowly rubs his bare chest with his hands, and goes into the water. and in the water, near the opaque soapy circles, little fish flit to and fro and green water-weeds nod their heads. after bathing there is tea with cream and milk rolls. . . . in the evening a walk or vint with the neighbors."yes, it would be nice to buy an estate," said his wife, also dreaming, and from her face it was evident that she was enchanted by her thoughts.ivan dmitritch pictured to himself autumn with its rains, its cold evenings, and its st. martin's summer. at that season he would have to take longer walks about the garden and beside the river, so as to get thoroughly chilled, and then drink a big glass of vodka and eat a salted mushroom or a soused cucumber, and then--drink another. . . . the children would come running from the kitchen-garden, bringing a carrot and a radish smelling of fresh earth. . . . and then, he would lie stretched full length on the sofa, and in leisurely fashion turn over the pages of some illustrated magazine, or, covering his face with it and unbuttoning his waistcoat, give himself up to slumber.the st. martin's summer is followed by cloudy, gloomy weather. it rains day and night, the bare trees weep, the wind is damp and cold. the dogs, the horses, the fowls--all are wet, depressed, downcast. there is nowhere to walk; one can't go out for days together; one has to pace up and down the room, looking despondently at the grey window. it is dreary!ivan dmitritch stopped and looked at his wife."i should go abroad, you know, masha," he said.and he began thinking how nice it would be in late autumn to go abroad somewhere to the south of france ... to italy ... to india!"i should certainly go abroad too," his wife said. "but look at the number of the ticket!""wait, wait! ..."he walked about the room and went on thinking. it occurred to him: what if his wife really did go abroad? it is pleasant to travel alone, or in the society of light, careless women who live in the present, and not such as think and talk all the journey about nothing but their children, sigh, and tremble with dismay over every farthing. ivan dmitritch imagined his wife in the train with a multitude of parcels, baskets, and bags; she would be sighing over something, complaining that the train made her head ache, that she had spent so much money.... at the stations he would continually be having to run for boiling water, bread and butter. ...she wouldn't have dinner because of its being too dear...."she would begrudge me every farthing," he thought, with a glance at his wife. "the lottery ticket is hers, not mine! besides, what is the use of her going abroad? what does she want there? she would shut herself up in the hotel, and not let me out of her sight.... i know!"and for the first time in his life his mind dwelt on the fact that his wife had grown elderly and plain, and that she was saturated through and through with the smell of cooking, while he was still young, fresh, and healthy, and might well have got married again."of course, all that is silly nonsense," he thought; "but...why should she go abroad? what would she make of it? and yet she would go, of course.... i can fancy.... in reality it is all one to her, whether it is naples or klin. she would only be in my way. i should be dependent upon her. i can fancy how, like a regular woman, she will lock the money up as soon as she gets it.... she will look after her relations and grudge me every farthing."ivan dmitritch thought of her relations. all those wretched brothers and sisters and aunts and uncles would come crawling about as soon as they heard of the winning ticket, would begin whining like beggars, and fawning upon them with oily, hypocritical smiles. wretched, detestable people! if they were given anything, they would ask for more; while if they were refused, they would swear at them, slander them, and wish them every kind of misfortune.ivan dmitritch remembered his own relations, and their faces, at which he had looked impartially in the past, struck him now as repulsive and hateful."they are such reptiles!" he thought.and his wife's face, too, struck him as repulsive and hateful. anger surged up in his heart against her, and he thought malignantly:"she knows nothing about money, and so she is stingy. if she won it she would give me a hundred roubles, and put the rest away under lock and key."and he looked at his wife, not with a smile now, but with hatred. she glanced at him too, and also with hatred and anger. she had her own daydreams, her own plans, her own reflections; she understood perfectly well what her husband's dreams were. she knew who would be the first to try to grab her winnings."it's very nice making daydreams at other people's expense!" is what her eyes expressed. "no, don't you dare!"her husband understood her look; hatred began stirring again in his breast, and in order to annoy his wife he glanced quickly, to spite her at the fourth page on the newspaper and read out triumphantly:"series 9,499, number 46! not 26!"hatred and hope both disappeared at once, and it began immediately to seem to ivan dmitritch and his wife that their rooms were dark and small and low-pitched, that the supper they had been eating was not doing them good, but lying heavy on their stomachs, that the evenings were long and wearisome. . . ."what the devil's the meaning of it?" said ivan dmitritch, beginning to be ill-humored. 'wherever one steps there are bits of paper under one's feet, crumbs, husks. the rooms are never swept! one is simply forced to go out. damnation take my soul entirely! i shall go and hang myself on the first aspen-tree!"serge kapitonich ahineev, the writing master, was marrying his daughter to the teacher of history and geography. the wedding festivities were going off most successfully. in the drawing room there was singing, playing, and dancing. waiters hired from the club were flitting distractedly about the rooms, dressed in black swallowtails and dirty white ties. there was a continual hubub and din of conversation. sitting side by side on the sofa, the teacher of mathematics, the french teacher, and the junior assessor of taxes were talking hurriedly and interrupting one another as they described to the guests cases of persons being buried alive, and gave their opinions on spiritualism. none of them believed in spiritualism, but all admitted that there were many things in this world which would always be beyond the mind of man. in the next room the literature master was explaining to the visitors the cases in which a sentry has the right to fire on passers-by. the subjects, as you perceive, were alarming, but very agreeable. persons whose social position precluded them from entering were looking in at the windows from the yard.just at midnight the master of the house went into the kitchen to see whether everything was ready for supper. the kitchen from floor to ceiling was filled with fumes composed of goose, duck, and many other odors. on two tables the accessories, the drinks and light refreshments, were set out in artistic disorder. the cook, marfa, a red-faced woman whose figure was like a barrel with a belt around it, was bustling about the tables."show me the sturgeon, marfa," said ahineev, rubbing his hands and licking his lips. "what a perfume! i could eat up the whole kitchen. come, show me the sturgeon."marfa went up to one of the benches and cautiously lifted a piece of greasy newspaper. under the paper on an immense dish there reposed a huge sturgeon, masked in jelly and decorated with capers, olives, and carrots. ahineev gazed at the sturgeon and gasped. his face beamed, he turned his eyes up. he bent down and with his lips emitted the sound of an ungreased wheel. after standing a moment he snapped his fingers with delight and once more smacked his lips."ah-ah! the sound of a passionate kiss. . . . who is it you're kissing out there, little marfa?" came a voice from the next room, and in the doorway there appeared the cropped head of the assistant usher, vankin. "who is it? a-a-h! . . . delighted to meet you! sergei kapitonich! you're a fine grandfather, i must say!""i'm not kissing," said ahineev in confusion. "who told you so, you fool? i was only . . . i smacked my lips . . . in reference to . . . as an indication of. . . pleasure . . . at the sight of the fish.""tell that to the marines!" the intrusive face vanished, wearing a broad grin.ahineev flushed."hang it!" he thought, "the beast will go now and talk scandal. he'll disgrace me to all the town, the brute."ahineev went timidly into the drawing room and looked stealthily round for vankin. vankin was standing by the piano, and, bending down with a jaunty air, was whispering something to the inspector's sister-in-law, who was laughing."talking about me!" thought ahineev. "about me, blast him! and she believes it . . . believes it! she laughs! mercy on us! no, i can't let it pass . . . i can't. i must do something to prevent his being believed. . . . i'll speak to them all, and he'll be shown up for a fool and a gossip."ahineev scratched his head, and still overcome with embarrassment, went up to the french teacher."i've just been in the kitchen to see after the supper," he said to the frenchman. "i know you are fond of fish, and i've a sturgeon, my dear fellow, beyond everything! a yard and a half long! ha, ha, ha! and, by the way . . . i was just forgetting. . . . in the kitchen just now, with that sturgeon . . . quite a little story! i went into the kitchen just now and wanted to look at the supper dishes. i looked at the sturgeon and i smacked my lips with relish . . . at the piquancy of it. and at the very moment that fool vankin came in and said: . . . 'ha, ha, ha! . . . so you're kissing here!' kissing marfa, the cook! what a thing to imagine, silly fool! the woman is a perfect fright, like all the beasts put together, and he talks about kissing! queer fish!""who's a queer fish?" asked the mathematics teacher, coming up."why he, over there--vankin! i went into the kitchen . . ."and he told the story of vankin. ". . . he amused me, queer fish! i'd rather kiss a dog than marfa, if you ask me," added ahineev. he looked round and saw behind him the junior assessor of taxes."we were talking of vankin," he said. "queer fish, he is! he went into the kitchen, saw me beside marfa, and began inventing all sorts of silly stories. 'why are you kissing?' he says. he must have had a drop too much. 'and i'd rather kiss a turkeycock than marfa,' i said, 'and i've a wife of my own, you fool,' said i. he did amuse me!""who amused you?" asked the priest who taught scripture in the school, going up to ahineev."vankin. i was standing in the kitchen, you know, looking at the sturgeon. . . ."and so on. within half an hour or so all the guests knew the incident of the sturgeon and vankin."let him tell away now!" thought ahineev, rubbing his hands. "let him! he'll begin telling his story and they'll say to him at once, 'enough of your improbable nonsense, you fool, we know all about it!"and ahineev was so relieved that in his joy he drank four glasses too many. after escorting the young people to their room, he went to bed and slept like an innocent babe, and next day he thought no more of the incident with the sturgeon. but, alas! man proposes, but god disposes. an evil tongue did its evil work, and ahineev's strategy was of no avail. just a week later--to be precise, on wednesday after the third lesson--when ahineev was standing in the middle of the teacher's room, holding forth on the vicious propensities of a boy called visekin, the headmaster went up to him and drew him aside:"look here, sergei kapitonich," said the headmaster, "you must excuse me. . . . it's not my business; but all the same i must make you realize. . . . it's my duty. you see, there are rumors that you are romancing with that . . . cook. . . . it's nothing to do with me, but . . . flirt with her, kiss her . . . as you please, but don't let it be so public, please. i entreat you! don't forget that you're a schoolmaster."ahineev turned cold and faint. he went home like a man stung by a whole swarm of bees, like a man scalded with boiling water. as he walked home, it seemed to him that the whole town was looking at him as though he were smeared with pitch. at home fresh trouble awaited him."why aren't you gobbling up your food as usual?" his wife asked him at dinner. "what are you so pensive about? brooding over your amours? pining for your marfa? i know all about it, mohammedan! kind friends have opened my eyes! o-o-o! . . . you savage !"and she slapped him in the face. he got up from the table, not feeling the earth under his feet, and without his hat or coat, made his way to vankin. he found him at home."you scoundrel!" he addressed him. "why have you covered me with mud before all the town? why did you set this slander going about me?""what slander? what are you talking about?""who was it gossiped of my kissing marfa? wasn't it you? tell me that. wasn't it you, you brigand?"vankin blinked and twitched in every fiber of his battered countenance, raised his eyes to the icon and articulated, "god blast me! strike me blind and lay me out, if i said a single word about you! may i be left without house and home, may i be stricken with worse than cholera!"vankin's sincerity did not admit of doubt. it was evidently not he who was the author of the slander."but who, then, who?" ahineev wondered, going over all his acquaintances in his mind and beating himself on the breast. "who, then?"mrs. brennen took snuff. she got it out of her grandson's store; going in and helping herself from the big tin on the second shelf. it was a habit her family deplored. mrs. brennen did not like snuff much. it was one of the things she had got over. it made her cough. but the fact that her family deplored her taking it prevented her from giving it up completely. she drank a little too. not much; just enough to get "tiddly." that was what she called it, "i'm a little tiddly to-day," she'd say, and the family didn't like that either. nor did she, save for the fun of shocking them and the interest outwitting them gave her.an old woman did not have much fun, and she had her reputation as a character to keep up. sometimes she wished she was not a character."mad," people called her behind her back; "eccentric," to her face. "dear mrs. brennen, you would do that. you are so eccentric." "mad" she would not agree to; "eccentric," yes; if it was eccentric to like sitting on the stoep in the sun and only talking when you wanted to. there was too much talk in the world. sometimes she would go for days without talking. "one of her spells," they called it. oh, yes, she knew what they said: "old mrs. brennen is having one of her spells." but she was too busy thinking to worry about what people thought. "let 'em talk," she said. "if they'd seen what i've seen, they'd stay silent. if they'd seen what i've seen, they'd have something to think about. lot of damned old women! that's what they are, men and all." her family made her laugh with their goings-on. when they reached her age, if they ever did, they'd know that nothing mattered very much. she took another pinch of snuff. some of it slipped between her fingers on to her black alpaca dress. she flicked it off with the back of her fingers and fumed to watch a span of oxen pull up to the store.the voorloper bent down to pick up some clods to throw into the faces of the oxen. the driver whistled and turned the handle of the brake. the big wheels locked, dragged on a yard or two and stopped. taking off his hat, the driver went into the store. the voorloper sat in the dust under the horns of the leaders.mrs. brennen wondered how many wagons she had seen pull up like that since she had come to brennen's store as a bride. thousands and thousands of wagons. thousands of men, too--white men, kaffirs, men on foot, in cape carts, in spiders, or riding, and now they came in motor-cars. mrs. brennen did not like motor-cars. of course they saved time. but what did one do with the time one saved? no one could tell her that. she chuckled. they couldn't tell her, because they didn't know.she had seen two wars and some native troubles. once when brennen was away, the store had been burned by kaffirs. she had just escaped. a friendly native had warned her. she had hidden in the bush. she had taken susie with her--a sweet little dog. she had never had another dog like susie-black and white, as soft to touch as silk, with a wet pink nose. generally, black-and-white dogs had black noses, but susie's had been pink. as she crouched among the rocks, the kaffirs had come quite near her. susie had tried to bark and she had held her between her knees and strangled her. then the kaffirs had gone and she had buried susie. the road had been moved since then, and the new store built. susie was buried about where the wagon stood now. she looked at her hands. they were very frail, veined, knotted and lumpy with gout. once they had been beautiful. brennen had said she had beautiful hands. once they had strangled a pet dog while wild kaffirs swarmed round her.they were off-loading the wagon. mealier. her grandson, george, was buying them, then. he would pay too much for them. he always paid too much for everything. she thought of a horse he had bought once. that must have been twenty years ago. like all horses said to be salted, it had died of horse sickness. she had told him it wasn't salted. anyone could see it was not salted. a salted horse had a look. you couldn't explain it. you just knew the look it had.george came out of the store now. a stupid boy. he always had been stupid."don't pay ten shillings a bag!" she shouted. "don't pay more than eight; and sample them!" if it wasn't for me, i don't believe he'd sample them, she thought. she watched him drive a knife with a hollow groove into the bags, emptying the pips into his hand. some chickens ran out to pick up the fallen mealiest one of them picked a tick from the heel of the near wheeler--a big red and white ox that was chewing its cud.mrs. brennen closed her eyes. sometimes they forgot who she was. yes, sometimes they forgot that it was still her store. that she was cecelia brennen, the mother of them all. the mother of a multitude of fools. children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren. it was hard to keep track of them now. each year they came to show her the new babies they had bred. she thought of her first grandson. she had been so pleased with him. she looked at george; he had been the first grandson. he was leaning against the door of the store. babies were like everything else; when there were so many of them, they became commonplace. it was hard to remember their names or even their mothers' names. she liked the kaffir babies best--black like puppies, and pleasantly nameless. the kaffir women who brought them to her to admire did not expect her to remember anything; all they wanted was a smile and a present. but that was what most people wanted, when you came to think of it--a smile and a present.she nodded her head. they thought her memory had gone; but she knew more than the whole pack of them put together. knew everything that was worth remembering. ninety-three, and the pattern of her life trailed out like a cloak behind her--her loves and hates, that had once been so hot and cold, all meaningless now--just part of the fabric; brilliant threads that had been woven through it. remember--she remembered all right. the things she forgot, like the names of her great-grandchildren, and of the women her grandsons had married, were not important. what did it matter if she did not recognise them all, so long as they knew her? besides, women all looked the same now. they had no character--short curly hair, red lips, red nails and no shape.she watched the wagon go. the driver shouted and clapped his whip. the voorloper trotted in front of the running oxen. the hind wheels were still locked, and dragged. that was like a kaffir, to start his span with the brake on. the driver clapped his whip again and took off the brake, then he ran forward and jumped on to the disselboom. she remembered a man being brought into the store who had been run over that way. he had slipped and the wheels had gone over his legs. empty of ballast, the wagon moved noisily. one wheel let out piercing squeaks. grease, mrs. brennen thought. george should have noticed it and sold him some grease.she stared down the road. it was red, unmetalled, dusty, and wide enough to turn a span. part of it was bordered with big blue gums; grey foliaged untidy trees whose bark hung in torn white ribbons from the trunks. there was the bottle store, the chemist's, the standard bank, the coolie store, and the usual white houses with red roofs that got smaller and more disreputable as the road went on. the best part of the dorp was behind her. that was where the doctor lived, and the bank manager, and mr. fairburn. no one knew quite what mr. fairburn did or where he got his money. that was where george wanted to live. he thought it was common to live opposite the store. he wanted to drive down to it in his new car each day, as if he was a professional man.she laughed. perhaps that was it, or perhaps he wanted her tucked away safely where she could not see everything that went on. but the store was her life. it did not change, like the children. it did not die. it did not go away. it grew, but it grew slowly and precisely. you knew which way it was going to grow. seventy years was a long time to sit in one place. she had been asked why she did not travel! travel. why go and look for life when it was going on all around you if you had eyes to see and waited long enough? she thought of the story of the two hunters. one had walked for miles, looking for game. the other had sat near a water-hole. the first had killed nothing. the second had taken what he wanted. it was better and less exhausting to let things come to you than to go and search for them. the store was like a water-hole--everyone had to come to it in the end. if they wanted a needle or a plough, they came to brennen's.she saw a car. what a dust it threw up! it came from pretoria. it was many years since she had been there. they said church square was now a garden. it had been the outspan. they had often outspanned there in the old days. sometimes there had been two hundred wagons, lying wheel to wheel. but the great days were gone, and where were the men to day who could compare with the men she had known then? men like the old president, joubert, de wet, de la rey, cecil rhodes, or doctor jim. men like brennen her husband. that was another reason she sat in the store all day. brennen was with her. she could feel his company.she looked at george. he had not moved. george was fat. she hated fat men. a fat woman was comfortable, but a fat man an abomination.the car stopped at the store. a young man got out; he had a letter in his hand. he looked at the notice outside the store. then he went up to george and gave him the letter. she would find out what was in it later. a man in a car bringing george a letter.george was bringing him over. he looked like an englishman. there was even something familiar about him. the turn of his head or the way he walked."she may know," she heard george say, "but she's difficult. she has spells."that was another of george's delusions--that she was deaf. she hated being shouted at, but it was worth letting them think it for the asides she heard."this is mr. vane," george said, putting his mouth to her ear. "he has come from england, ouma."she put out her hand. "i can see he comes from england," she said. "look at his boots." mrs. brennen wondered if she would take snuff now or later. he seemed a nice young man, fresh complexioned, very clean and shiny, with reddish hair."sit down," she said.he sat down."how much did you pay for those mealies, george?" she asked."nine shillings."he would go in a minute and leave her with the young man. george got up."i said you weren't to pay more than eight."she looked him up and down. once she had had great hopes of george."i'ii be going," george said. "see you later.""thank you," the englishman said. "i do hope i'm not being a nuisance, mrs. brennen.""nothing is a nuisance now," she said.she got her snuff-box. "take snuff?" she asked."no, thank you.""quite right, young man. a filthy habit. he"--she pointed to george's back--"thinks i am a disgrace to the family." she chuckled. "but i bred them. if it wasn't for me, there'd be no family--and the store is mine. that's what they don't like. they'd like to sell the store and go into something else--too grand for brennen's general store. ride round in motor-cars. that's what they want to do--just ride round and round. there's no sense in riding round and round." she looked at her visitor. he seemed a little bewildered. never seen anyone like me before, she thought."never seen anyone like me, have you?" she asked. "and you won't again, young man; i'm one of the last of them. real people, we were. men and women. real," she said. she closed her eyes. "what do you want?" she asked. "why did you come here? who gave you a letter to george? no good having a letter to george. he's a fool. he's my grandson, and i know.""it's a long story." francis vane lit a cigarette. he wondered how to begin. "it's my father," he said. "you see, his father--my grandfather--was killed near here with the three hundred and first, and i wondered if anyone could tell me about it. they sent me to george brennen. i had a letter to him.""no good sending anyone to him," mrs. brennen said."do you remember them coming here?" vane asked. "it was in november 1880.""of course i remember," mrs. brennen said. "john--that's george's father--was ill then. we thought he would die, and then they came. 'kiss me mother . . . kiss your darling daughter'--that's the tune they played as they marched in. they had a doctor with them--a captain bull. he saved john's life and we gave him a cage of wild birds. . . .  but what do you want to know? she asked."i want to know how it happened. you see, my grandfather commanded the three hundred and first. he was killed. they said it was his fault. that he was incompetent. my father is very old now and he broods about it. he wants to know where his father is buried. he wants to know what happened. he's very old," he said again."i'm very old," mrs. brennen said, "and i know; i brood too. thinking, i call it. your grandfather. then that's it. that's why i thought i'd seen you before. i danced with him that night. he danced well. we gave them a dance in the old store." she nodded to the warehouse behind the present building. "we cleared everything out. ploughs, harrows, soft goods and all. we put buck sails over them and gave the officers a dance. they had come from lydenburg and were going to pretoria. they didn't think there'd be a war. they said it would be a massacre if it came--boars against trained troops like them. the three hundred and first," mrs. brennen said. "yes, the three hundred and first."francis vane leaned forward.mrs. brennen saw it all. she saw them march in. "kiss me, mother . . . kiss your darling daughter." the drum-major tossed his stick, caught it, twirled it; men in red--an endless stream of sunburnt young men in red-mounted officers, rumbling transport, mules, baggage, wagons drawn by oxen, dogs that followed the battalion with lolling tongues.for a day brennensdorp had been gay, populated with soldiers. they had swarmed everywhere--walking about in pairs, standing in groups, or lying on their backs in the shade of the gum trees--they had been small then and their shade thin. she saw them washing in buckets, their young chests bare, their hair wet, their eyes wrinkled against the soapy water. she had propped johnny up so that he could see the soldiers. and it had been hot. it was not hot like that now. it had been so hot that the sheets of corrugated iron on the roof cracked as they pulled at the nails. the trees had danced up and down on the veld and the road was wet with mirage water. the red jackets of the troops had made it seem hotter. wherever you looked there were red jackets. how they worked to empty the store! everyone had helped. they had thrown mealie meal on the floor to make it fit for dancing.the colonel had come to thank her. "thank you, mrs. brennen," he had said. "it is very kind of you to entertain us like this."colonel vane had admired her. she had seen it in his eyes. "i hear your little boy is ill" he said. "perhaps we can help you. would you like to see captain bull, our doctor?"she had seen him. a kindly man. he had come at once in his dusty boots. brennen had given him beer. the bottles were kept cool in a canvas bucket that hung from the roof. "i'll stay with him, mrs. brennen," the doctor said, and he had stayed watching at the bedside.the dance had been an event. boys had been sent out to call in the countryside--all that were loyal, that is--and they had come, every man and woman and girl for miles round. both sides of the street had been full of their cape carts and buggies. the regimental band played tune after tune. the doorway was filled with watching tommies. the dust and mealie flour had risen off the floor in clouds. it clung to the dresses of the girls, to the clothes and moustaches of the men. music, laughter and some kissing.there was a tale she had heard about a clown who had made jokes while his little son was dying. she felt like that clown. she kept going in to look at johnny. the doctor put his finger to his lips and motioned her away. she had gone away. . . ."may i have the pleasure of this dance, mrs. brennen?""delighted.""how well you dance, mrs. brennen.""how light you are, mrs. brennen."what did they expect, she wondered. it was strange how one could go on saying and doing all the right things when one was feeling nothing. it was as if one stood some way off watching oneself. she had noticed this, time and again. that cannot be me. this cannot be me. cecelia brennen could not be doing this. but cecelia brennen was doing it. her place was with her son; her place was at the dance. she was mrs. brennen, the wife of john brennen, of brennensdorp. it was her place to entertain the soldiers of the queen.there had been a great killing of beasts and fowls, a great baking, a great emptying of casks of wine and brandy. she had seen to it all, and to her sick child as well. she had worn cyclamen taffeta with a bustle and hoops.her hair hung in ringlets round her neck. a pretty young thing--the belle of the ball and the mother of a dying child. but he had not died. if only johnny can grow up strong and healthy, like these officers, she thought. if only-- excusing herself, she ran to see him. captain bull was asleep; the child slept, too, his hand in that of the soldier. how tired he looked!in the morning johnny was better. "he'll come through," the doctor said. he made up medicine for him in a whisky bottle. she and brennen had wondered what they could give him. they could not give money. "give him my cage of birds," johnny said. they were beautiful birds; little finks of every colour--rooibekkies, blouvinks, kingvinks. they were all tame, and sang and twittered on their perches. she had taken them to captain bull. "a present from johnny," she said. brennen had come at that moment with a kaffir carrying a case of champagne. the champagne and the birds had been stowed in the doctor's cart. the case of wine on the bed, and the cage slung from the roof and lashed to the sides, so that it should not swing."good morning, mrs. brennen." colonel vane rode up. "i am glad to hear your little boy is better."behind the colonel there was a donkey wagon loaded with yellow peaches. it had just come in and the soldiers were crowded round it, eating peaches and stuffing them into their haversacks to eat on the march. the colonel was laughing."fruit's good for them," he said."it's a good year for peaches. and the trees in the district are weighed down with them," she said.then the bugles sounded. the colour-sergeants shouted, "fall in." the markers were waiting. the men, fully accoutre, ruddy with sleep, ran out. transport drivers cursed as their hubs bumped. the three hundred and first was going. they had come and they were going."kiss me, mother . . . kiss your darling daughter"--the band struck up again. like a red snake the regiment swung out of the dorp in a cloud of dust. then the dust fell. to-night they would lie in pretoria.* * *the three hundred and first had gone and johnny would get well. she was sitting with johnny when it happened. a man came galloping down the street. a private soldier, wounded, riding an officer's charger. it was streaked with sweat, its chest splashed with foam, its eyes were wild. she recognised the horse. it was colonel vane's horse. the big bay she had patted as he said good-bye.the soldier pulled up and almost fell from the saddle."what is it?" she said. "oh, what is it?" she knelt beside him in the dust."the doctor sent me to get help! they are all finished!" he said. "they're cut to hell--the whole bloody lot! we walked into it! the colonel's dead! i took his horse!" he began to cry. "they got us--they got us fair! it was murder!"he was only a boy. she held him in her arms and the blood from the wound in his neck ran on to her shoulder. suddenly he sat up. "bandages," he said, "and brandy . . . and food! that's what the doctor said! we've got no bandages! they're all bleeding, and nothing to stop it! oh, god, mrs. brennen, nothing to stop it! i must get back!" he dragged the horse towards him and tried to mount."what are you going to do?" she asked."i don't know, but i must go back. i can't stay here.""where is it? where did it happen?""at the little river--they were all round us.""the spruit?""that's what they call it."brennen was inspanning already, loading up the cape cart. that would be the quickest; the wagons could follow. it was not very far. she ran into the house for sheets, towels, bedding, mattresses, blankets, brandy; the house and store were emptied of everything that might be useful.she climbed into the cart beside her husband. he had put in four horses instead of two."trot the oxen, jan!" he shouted to the driver who was inspanning."they cannot trot so far, baas!""trot them and be damned!" brennen said.and then they were off at a gallop, rocking first on one wheel and then on the other as they hit the bumps in the road. hardly checking for the drift, they splashed through the water. brennen hit the horses as they slowed up to pull out of it. she had never seen him hit a horse before. they sprang into the traces again with such a jerk that she thought the swingletree would break loose. she looked at the pole. brennen had tied it with a double riem. they were on the flat now. the horses were bolting. let them bolt. nothing could go wrong with a strong cart and good gear on a straight road unless one of the horses fell. the whip clapped like a pistol as brennen urged them to greater speed. the four reins were like live things in his hands as he cried out the horses' names: "bles! charlie! klinkie! chaka!" chaka was a new black horse. brennen had put him on the off lead, where he could get at him best with his whip. "come, bles! . . . come, charlie!" she gripped the arms of her chair. what a drive it had been. she smelt the dust in her nostrils.the road was always dusty, but now it had been made worse by the passing of a thousand men and their transport. the dust rose in clouds, obliterating everything, so that sometimes she could see only the horses' ears and their tossing manes. the reins went down to nothing. they disappeared into the dust. she could see no road. that they kept on it was a miracle.and then they got there. the horses shied and pulled across the road as the leaders almost ran into an overturned wagon.the dust fell slowly."you've come." it was the boy on the colonel's horse. "i was coming back to find you," he said.they got out of the cart. some soldiers took the horses out. she saw it all--the undulating ground, the bush, the trees by the road--many of them scored by bullets. there was blood everywhere. it ran down the sloping road into pools.they helped the doctor to move the men, to bandage, to cut more bandages. tents were pitched, food cooked, great cauldrons of hot water got ready to dress the wounded. she had gone in to colonel vane. his legs were off. while she was with him, frantz joubert, the boer commandant, had come in."will you drink with me, commandant?" the colonel said. "and you, too, mrs. brennen." it was the champagne her husband had given the doctor. they drank. joubert said, "here's to queen victoria. may she live long and take her soldiers from the transvaal."they had wrapped the dead in blankets and buried them where they fell along the side of the road, on the veld where they had taken up their positions. beside almost every body there were peaches; they had fallen from the hands of the men as they were ambushed. their pipe-clayed haversacks still bulged with them. the dead of the three hundred and first were buried with their peaches where they lay.she saw johnny's cage of birds. it was broken and the birds were free. the wild birds were free once more and the men were dead.* * *"yes," she said, looking up, "that's what happened to the three hundred and first. the birds were free and the men were dead, and buried where they fell.""but--" vane said.she had not spoken. she had sat for nearly half an hour with her head sunk on her breast.she looked accusingly at her grandson. "and they think i can't remember. i can remember everything. i can even remember the names.""that's what i was afraid of," george brennen said--"one of her spells."they were silent, staring at the old woman; her head was lowered again.* * *suddenly, from the next house, a woman screamed at a child."didn't i tell you not to eat so many peaches? peaches--you guzzle peaches all day, and then bring them home at night, so that you can eat more. you'll be sick, i say. where did you get them? did you steal them?""i didn't steal them, mother. they're the soldiers' peaches. we drove ova there to get them. they're wild peaches." the child was crying.mrs. brennen got up. "let her have the peaches. let her have all she wants. the soldiers' peaches never hurt anyone." mrs. brennen sat down again. "the soldiers' peaches," she said--"that grew out of their pockets."tears ran down her cheeks. they followed the lines of her face and dripped on to the snuff-stained alpaca dress. she made no effort to stay them."out of their pockets?" vane said."she means their haversacks.""then there are peach trees?""yes, there are trees--plenty of them.""and they buried them where they fell? do you know the place well?" vane asked."everyone knows it well. all the children get peaches from them. they grow like this." george brennen traced a pattern on the dust of the stoep with his finger. "here is where there are the most. . . .  that was where the main body got it. . . .  they were buried on both sides of the road . . . and out here is where the scouts fell.'' he made scattered dots."then there were scouts out," vane said. "and it wasn't my grandfather's fault.""it was nobody's fault," brennen said. "the boers were hidden and they held their fire."vane laughed. "can we go over there to-morrow?" he asked. "i'll make a map of it for my father. poor father," he said. "if only he had known this years ago! he nearly came once, and then he was afraid to come--afraid of what he'd find.""we call them the soldiers' peaches," george brennen said. "and i wish she had told you the story--i have heard it hundreds of times--but she's old; she has spells."his grandmother looked up. "i remember as well as anyone," she said. she pointed to vane. "i remember his grandfather. a fine man. there were some fine men in those days."brennen took vane's shoulder. "come along to my place. spend the night and we'll drive over there to-morrow.""off there to the right--somewhere--is a large island," said whitney." it's rather a mystery--""what island is it?" rainsford asked."the old charts call it 'ship-trap island,"' whitney replied."  a suggestive name, isn't it? sailors have a curious dread of the place. i don't know why. some superstition--""can't see it," remarked rainsford, trying to peer through the dank tropical night that was palpable as it pressed its thick warm blackness in upon the yacht."you've good eyes," said whitney, with a laugh," and i've seen you pick off a moose moving in the brown fall bush at four hundred yards, but even you can't see four miles or so through a moonless caribbean night.""nor four yards," admitted rainsford. "ugh! it's like moist black velvet.""it will be light enough in rio," promised whitney. "we should make it in a few days. i hope the jaguar guns have come from purdey's. we should have some good hunting up the amazon. great sport, hunting.""the best sport in the world," agreed rainsford."for the hunter," amended whitney. "not for the jaguar.""don't talk rot, whitney," said rainsford. "you're a big-game hunter, not a philosopher. who cares how a jaguar feels?""perhaps the jaguar does," observed whitney."bah! they've no understanding.""even so, i rather think they understand one thing--fear. the fear of pain and the fear of death.""nonsense," laughed rainsford. "this hot weather is making you soft, whitney. be a realist. the world is made up of two classes--the hunters and the huntees. luckily, you and i are hunters. do you think we've passed that island yet?""i can't tell in the dark. i hope so.""why? " asked rainsford."the place has a reputation--a bad one.""cannibals?" suggested rainsford."hardly. even cannibals wouldn't live in such a god-forsaken place. but it's gotten into sailor lore, somehow. didn't you notice that the crew's nerves seemed a bit jumpy today?""they were a bit strange, now you mention it. even captain nielsen--""yes, even that tough-minded old swede, who'd go up to the devil himself and ask him for a light. those fishy blue eyes held a look i never saw there before. all i could get out of him was 'this place has an evil name among seafaring men, sir.' then he said to me, very gravely, 'don't you feel anything?'--as if the air about us was actually poisonous. now, you mustn't laugh when i tell you this--i did feel something like a sudden chill."there was no breeze. the sea was as flat as a plate-glass window. we were drawing near the island then. what i felt was a--a mental chill; a sort of sudden dread.""pure imagination," said rainsford."one superstitious sailor can taint the whole ship's company with his fear.""maybe. but sometimes i think sailors have an extra sense that tells them when they are in danger. sometimes i think evil is a tangible thing--with wave lengths, just as sound and light have. an evil place can, so to speak, broadcast vibrations of evil. anyhow, i'm glad we're getting out of this zone. well, i think i'll turn in now, rainsford.""i'm not sleepy," said rainsford. "i'm going to smoke another pipe up on the afterdeck.""good night, then, rainsford. see you at breakfast.""right. good night, whitney."there was no sound in the night as rainsford sat there but the muffled throb of the engine that drove the yacht swiftly through the darkness, and the swish and ripple of the wash of the propeller.rainsford, reclining in a steamer chair, indolently puffed on his favorite brier. the sensuous drowsiness of the night was on him." it's so dark," he thought, "that i could sleep without closing my eyes; the night would be my eyelids--"an abrupt sound startled him. off to the right he heard it, and his ears, expert in such matters, could not be mistaken. again he heard the sound, and again. somewhere, off in the blackness, someone had fired a gun three times.rainsford sprang up and moved quickly to the rail, mystified. he strained his eyes in the direction from which the reports had come, but it was like trying to see through a blanket. he leaped upon the rail and balanced himself there, to get greater elevation; his pipe, striking a rope, was knocked from his mouth. he lunged for it; a short, hoarse cry came from his lips as he realized he had reached too far and had lost his balance. the cry was pinched off short as the blood-warm waters of the caribbean sea dosed over his head.he struggled up to the surface and tried to cry out, but the wash from the speeding yacht slapped him in the face and the salt water in his open mouth made him gag and strangle. desperately he struck out with strong strokes after the receding lights of the yacht, but he stopped before he had swum fifty feet. a certain coolheadedness had come to him; it was not the first time he had been in a tight place. there was a chance that his cries could be heard by someone aboard the yacht, but that chance was slender and grew more slender as the yacht raced on. he wrestled himself out of his clothes and shouted with all his power. the lights of the yacht became faint and ever-vanishing fireflies; then they were blotted out entirely by the night.rainsford remembered the shots. they had come from the right, and doggedly he swam in that direction, swimming with slow, deliberate strokes, conserving his strength. for a seemingly endless time he fought the sea. he began to count his strokes; he could do possibly a hundred more and then--rainsford heard a sound. it came out of the darkness, a high screaming sound, the sound of an animal in an extremity of anguish and terror.he did not recognize the animal that made the sound; he did not try to; with fresh vitality he swam toward the sound. he heard it again; then it was cut short by another noise, crisp, staccato."pistol shot," muttered rainsford, swimming on.ten minutes of determined effort brought another sound to his ears--the most welcome he had ever heard--the muttering and growling of the sea breaking on a rocky shore. he was almost on the rocks before he saw them; on a night less calm he would have been shattered against them. with his remaining strength he dragged himself from the swirling waters. jagged crags appeared to jut up into the opaqueness; he forced himself upward, hand over hand. gasping, his hands raw, he reached a flat place at the top. dense jungle came down to the very edge of the cliffs. what perils that tangle of trees and underbrush might hold for him did not concern rainsford just then. all he knew was that he was safe from his enemy, the sea, and that utter weariness was on him. he flung himself down at the jungle edge and tumbled headlong into the deepest sleep of his life.when he opened his eyes he knew from the position of the sun that it was late in the afternoon. sleep had given him new vigor; a sharp hunger was picking at him. he looked about him, almost cheerfully."where there are pistol shots, there are men. where there are men, there is food," he thought. but what kind of men, he wondered, in so forbidding a place? an unbroken front of snarled and ragged jungle fringed the shore.he saw no sign of a trail through the closely knit web of weeds and trees; it was easier to go along the shore, and rainsford floundered along by the water. not far from where he landed, he stopped.some wounded thing--by the evidence, a large animal--had thrashed about in the underbrush; the jungle weeds were crushed down and the moss was lacerated; one patch of weeds was stained crimson. a small, glittering object not far away caught rainsford's eye and he picked it up. it was an empty cartridge."a twenty-two," he remarked. "that's odd. it must have been a fairly large animal too. the hunter had his nerve with him to tackle it with a light gun. it's clear that the brute put up a fight. i suppose the first three shots i heard was when the hunter flushed his quarry and wounded it. the last shot was when he trailed it here and finished it."he examined the ground closely and found what he had hoped to find--the print of hunting boots. they pointed along the cliff in the direction he had been going. eagerly he hurried along, now slipping on a rotten log or a loose stone, but making headway; night was beginning to settle down on the island.bleak darkness was blacking out the sea and jungle when rainsford sighted the lights. he came upon them as he turned a crook in the coast line; and his first thought was that be had come upon a village, for there were many lights. but as he forged along he saw to his great astonishment that all the lights were in one enormous building--a lofty structure with pointed towers plunging upward into the gloom. his eyes made out the shadowy outlines of a palatial chateau; it was set on a high bluff, and on three sides of it cliffs dived down to where the sea licked greedy lips in the shadows."mirage," thought rainsford. but it was no mirage, he found, when he opened the tall spiked iron gate. the stone steps were real enough; the massive door with a leering gargoyle for a knocker was real enough; yet above it all hung an air of unreality.he lifted the knocker, and it creaked up stiffly, as if it had never before been used. he let it fall, and it startled him with its booming loudness. he thought he heard steps within; the door remained closed. again rainsford lifted the heavy knocker, and let it fall. the door opened then--opened as suddenly as if it were on a spring--and rainsford stood blinking in the river of glaring gold light that poured out. the first thing rainsford's eyes discerned was the largest man rainsford had ever seen--a gigantic creature, solidly made and black bearded to the waist. in his hand the man held a long-barreled revolver, and he was pointing it straight at rainsford's heart.out of the snarl of beard two small eyes regarded rainsford."don't be alarmed," said rainsford, with a smile which he hoped was disarming. "i'm no robber. i fell off a yacht. my name is sanger rainsford of new york city."the menacing look in the eyes did not change. the revolver pointing as rigidly as if the giant were a statue. he gave no sign that he understood rainsford's words, or that he had even heard them. he was dressed in uniform--a black uniform trimmed with gray astrakhan."i'm sanger rainsford of new york," rainsford began again. "i fell off a yacht. i am hungry."the man's only answer was to raise with his thumb the hammer of his revolver. then rainsford saw the man's free hand go to his forehead in a military salute, and he saw him click his heels together and stand at attention. another man was coming down the broad marble steps, an erect, slender man in evening clothes. he advanced to rainsford and held out his hand.in a cultivated voice marked by a slight accent that gave it added precision and deliberateness, he said, "it is a very great pleasure and honor to welcome mr. sanger rainsford, the celebrated hunter, to my home."automatically rainsford shook the man's hand."i've read your book about hunting snow leopards in tibet, you see," explained the man. "i am general zaroff."rainsford's first impression was that the man was singularly handsome; his second was that there was an original, almost bizarre quality about the general's face. he was a tall man past middle age, for his hair was a vivid white; but his thick eyebrows and pointed military mustache were as black as the night from which rainsford had come. his eyes, too, were black and very bright. he had high cheekbones, a sharpcut nose, a spare, dark face--the face of a man used to giving orders, the face of an aristocrat. turning to the giant in uniform, the general made a sign. the giant put away his pistol, saluted, withdrew."ivan is an incredibly strong fellow," remarked the general, "but he has the misfortune to be deaf and dumb. a simple fellow, but, i'm afraid, like all his race, a bit of a savage.""is he russian?""he is a cossack," said the general, and his smile showed red lips and pointed teeth. "so am i.""come," he said, "we shouldn't be chatting here. we can talk later. now you want clothes, food, rest. you shall have them. this is a most-restful spot."ivan had reappeared, and the general spoke to him with lips that moved but gave forth no sound."follow ivan, if you please, mr. rainsford," said the general. "i was about to have my dinner when you came. i'll wait for you. you'll find that my clothes will fit you, i think."it was to a huge, beam-ceilinged bedroom with a canopied bed big enough for six men that rainsford followed the silent giant. ivan laid out an evening suit, and rainsford, as he put it on, noticed that it came from a london tailor who ordinarily cut and sewed for none below the rank of duke.the dining room to which ivan conducted him was in many ways remarkable. there was a medieval magnificence about it; it suggested a baronial hall of feudal times with its oaken panels, its high ceiling, its vast refectory tables where twoscore men could sit down to eat. about the hall were mounted heads of many animals--lions, tigers, elephants, moose, bears; larger or more perfect specimens rainsford had never seen. at the great table the general was sitting, alone."you'll have a cocktail, mr. rainsford," he suggested. the cocktail was surpassingly good; and, rainsford noted, the table apointments were of the finest--the linen, the crystal, the silver, the china.they were eating borsch, the rich, red soup with whipped cream so dear to russian palates. half apologetically general zaroff said, "we do our best to preserve the amenities of civilization here. please forgive any lapses. we are well off the beaten track, you know. do you think the champagne has suffered from its long ocean trip?""not in the least," declared rainsford. he was finding the general a most thoughtful and affable host, a true cosmopolite. but there was one small trait of the general's that made rainsford uncomfortable. whenever he looked up from his plate he found the general studying him, appraising him narrowly."perhaps," said general zaroff, "you were surprised that i recognized your name. you see, i read all books on hunting published in english, french, and russian. i have but one passion in my life, mr. rainsford, and it is the hunt.""you have some wonderful heads here," said rainsford as he ate a particularly well-cooked filet mignon. " that cape buffalo is the largest i ever saw.""oh, that fellow. yes, he was a monster.""did he charge you?""hurled me against a tree," said the general. "fractured my skull. but i got the brute.""i've always thought," said rainsford, "that the cape buffalo is the most dangerous of all big game."for a moment the general did not reply; he was smiling his curious red-lipped smile. then he said slowly, "no. you are wrong, sir. the cape buffalo is not the most dangerous big game." he sipped his wine. "here in my preserve on this island," he said in the same slow tone, "i hunt more dangerous game."rainsford expressed his surprise. "is there big game on this island?"the general nodded. "the biggest.""really?""oh, it isn't here naturally, of course. i have to stock the island.""what have you imported, general?" rainsford asked. "tigers?"the general smiled. "no," he said. "hunting tigers ceased to interest me some years ago. i exhausted their possibilities, you see. no thrill left in tigers, no real danger. i live for danger, mr. rainsford."the general took from his pocket a gold cigarette case and offered his guest a long black cigarette with a silver tip; it was perfumed and gave off a smell like incense."we will have some capital hunting, you and i," said the general. "i shall be most glad to have your society.""but what game--" began rainsford."i'll tell you," said the general. "you will be amused, i know. i think i may say, in all modesty, that i have done a rare thing. i have invented a new sensation. may i pour you another glass of port?""thank you, general."the general filled both glasses, and said, "god makes some men poets. some he makes kings, some beggars. me he made a hunter. my hand was made for the trigger, my father said. he was a very rich man with a quarter of a million acres in the crimea, and he was an ardent sportsman. when i was only five years old he gave me a little gun, specially made in moscow for me, to shoot sparrows with. when i shot some of his prize turkeys with it, he did not punish me; he complimented me on my marksmanship. i killed my first bear in the caucasus when i was ten. my whole life has been one prolonged hunt. i went into the army--it was expected of noblemen's sons--and for a time commanded a division of cossack cavalry, but my real interest was always the hunt. i have hunted every kind of game in every land. it would be impossible for me to tell you how many animals i have killed."the general puffed at his cigarette."after the debacle in russia i left the country, for it was imprudent for an officer of the czar to stay there. many noble russians lost everything. i, luckily, had invested heavily in american securities, so i shall never have to open a tearoom in monte carlo or drive a taxi in paris. naturally, i continued to hunt--grizzlies in your rockies, crocodiles in the ganges, rhinoceroses in east africa. it was in africa that the cape buffalo hit me and laid me up for six months. as soon as i recovered i started for the amazon to hunt jaguars, for i had heard they were unusually cunning. they weren't." the cossack sighed. "they were no match at all for a hunter with his wits about him, and a high-powered rifle. i was bitterly disappointed. i was lying in my tent with a splitting headache one night when a terrible thought pushed its way into my mind. hunting was beginning to bore me! and hunting, remember, had been my life. i have heard that in america businessmen often go to pieces when they give up the business that has been their life.""yes, that's so," said rainsford.the general smiled. "i had no wish to go to pieces," he said. "i must do something. now, mine is an analytical mind, mr. rainsford. doubtless that is why i enjoy the problems of the chase.""no doubt, general zaroff.""so," continued the general, "i asked myself why the hunt no longer fascinated me. you are much younger than i am, mr. rainsford, and have not hunted as much, but you perhaps can guess the answer.""what was it?""simply this: hunting had ceased to be what you call 'a sporting proposition.' it had become too easy. i always got my quarry. always. there is no greater bore than perfection."the general lit a fresh cigarette."no animal had a chance with me any more. that is no boast; it is a mathematical certainty. the animal had nothing but his legs and his instinct. instinct is no match for reason. when i thought of this it was a tragic moment for me, i can tell you."rainsford leaned across the table, absorbed in what his host was saying."it came to me as an inspiration what i must do," the general went on."and that was?"the general smiled the quiet smile of one who has faced an obstacle and surmounted it with success. "i had to invent a new animal to hunt," he said."a new animal? you're joking.""not at all," said the general. "i never joke about hunting. i needed a new animal. i found one. so i bought this island built this house, and here i do my hunting. the island is perfect for my purposes--there are jungles with a maze of traits in them, hills, swamps--""but the animal, general zaroff?""oh," said the general, "it supplies me with the most exciting hunting in the world. no other hunting compares with it for an instant. every day i hunt, and i never grow bored now, for i have a quarry with which i can match my wits."rainsford's bewilderment showed in his face."i wanted the ideal animal to hunt," explained the general. "so i said, 'what are the attributes of an ideal quarry?' and the answer was, of course, 'it must have courage, cunning, and, above all, it must be able to reason."'"but no animal can reason," objected rainsford."my dear fellow," said the general, "there is one that can.""but you can't mean--" gasped rainsford."and why not?""i can't believe you are serious, general zaroff. this is a grisly joke.""why should i not be serious? i am speaking of hunting.""hunting? great guns, general zaroff, what you speak of is murder."the general laughed with entire good nature. he regarded rainsford quizzically. "i refuse to believe that so modern and civilized a young man as you seem to be harbors romantic ideas about the value of human life. surely your experiences in the war--""did not make me condone cold-blooded murder," finished rainsford stiffly.laughter shook the general. "how extraordinarily droll you are!" he said. "one does not expect nowadays to find a young man of the educated class, even in america, with such a naïve, and, if i may say so, mid-victorian point of view. it's like finding a snuffbox in a limousine. ah, well, doubtless you had puritan ancestors. so many americans appear to have had. i'll wager you'll forget your notions when you go hunting with me. you've a genuine new thrill in store for you, mr. rainsford.""thank you, i'm a hunter, not a murderer.""dear me," said the general, quite unruffled, "again that unpleasant word. but i think i can show you that your scruples are quite ill founded.""yes?""life is for the strong, to be lived by the strong, and, if needs be, taken by the strong. the weak of the world were put here to give the strong pleasure. i am strong. why should i not use my gift? if i wish to hunt, why should i not? i hunt the scum of the earth: sailors from tramp ships--lassars, blacks, chinese, whites, mongrels--a thoroughbred horse or hound is worth more than a score of them.""but they are men," said rainsford hotly."precisely," said the general. "that is why i use them. it gives me pleasure. they can reason, after a fashion. so they are dangerous.""but where do you get them?"the general's left eyelid fluttered down in a wink. "this island is called ship trap," he answered. "sometimes an angry god of the high seas sends them to me. sometimes, when providence is not so kind, i help providence a bit. come to the window with me."rainsford went to the window and looked out toward the sea."watch! out there!" exclaimed the general, pointing into the night. rainsford's eyes saw only blackness, and then, as the general pressed a button, far out to sea rainsford saw the flash of lights.the general chuckled. "they indicate a channel," he said, "where there's none; giant rocks with razor edges crouch like a sea monster with wide-open jaws. they can crush a ship as easily as i crush this nut." he dropped a walnut on the hardwood floor and brought his heel grinding down on it. "oh, yes," he said, casually, as if in answer to a question, "i have electricity. we try to be civilized here.""civilized? and you shoot down men?"a trace of anger was in the general's black eyes, but it was there for but a second; and he said, in his most pleasant manner, "dear me, what a righteous young man you are! i assure you i do not do the thing you suggest. that would be barbarous. i treat these visitors with every consideration. they get plenty of good food and exercise. they get into splendid physical condition. you shall see for yourself tomorrow.""what do you mean?""we'll visit my training school," smiled the general. "it's in the cellar. i have about a dozen pupils down there now. they're from the spanish bark san lucar that had the bad luck to go on the rocks out there. a very inferior lot, i regret to say. poor specimens and more accustomed to the deck than to the jungle."  he raised his hand, and ivan, who served as waiter, brought thick turkish coffee. rainsford, with an effort, held his tongue in check."it's a game, you see," pursued the general blandly. "i suggest to one of them that we go hunting. i give him a supply of food and an excellent hunting knife. i give him three hours' start. i am to follow, armed only with a pistol of the smallest caliber and range. if my quarry eludes me for three whole days, he wins the game. if i find him "--the general smiled--" he loses.""suppose he refuses to be hunted?""oh," said the general, "i give him his option, of course. he need not play that game if he doesn't wish to. if he does not wish to hunt, i turn him over to ivan. ivan once had the honor of serving as official knouter to the great white czar, and he has his own ideas of sport. invariably, mr. rainsford, invariably they choose the hunt.""and if they win?"the smile on the general's face widened. "to date i have not lost," he said. then he added, hastily: "i don't wish you to think me a braggart, mr. rainsford. many of them afford only the most elementary sort of problem. occasionally i strike a tartar. one almost did win. i eventually had to use the dogs.""the dogs?""this way, please. i'll show you."the general steered rainsford to a window. the lights from the windows sent a flickering illumination that made grotesque patterns on the courtyard below, and rainsford could see moving about there a dozen or so huge black shapes; as they turned toward him, their eyes glittered greenly."and now," said the general, "i want to show you my new collection of heads. will you come with me to the library?""i hope," said rainsford, "that you will excuse me tonight, general zaroff. i'm really not feeling well.""ah, indeed?" the general inquired solicitously. "well, i suppose that's only natural, after your long swim. you need a good, restful night's sleep. tomorrow you'll feel like a new man, i'll wager. then we'll hunt, eh? i've one rather promising prospect--" rainsford was hurrying from the room."sorry you can't go with me tonight," called the general. "i expect rather fair sport--a big, strong, black. he looks resourceful--well, good night, mr. rainsford; i hope you have a good night's rest."the bed was good, and the pajamas of the softest silk, and he was tired in every fiber of his being, but nevertheless rainsford could not quiet his brain with the opiate of sleep. he lay, eyes wide open. once he thought he heard stealthy steps in the corridor outside his room. he sought to throw open the door; it would not open. he went to the window and looked out. his room was high up in one of the towers. the lights of the chateau were out now, and it was dark and silent; but there was a fragment of sallow moon, and by its wan light he could see, dimly, the courtyard. there, weaving in and out in the pattern of shadow, were black, noiseless forms; the hounds heard him at the window and looked up, expectantly, with their green eyes. rainsford went back to the bed and lay down. by many methods he tried to put himself to sleep. he had achieved a doze when, just as morning began to come, he heard, far off in the jungle, the faint report of a pistol.general zaroff did not appear until luncheon. he was dressed faultlessly in the tweeds of a country squire. he was solicitous about the state of rainsford's health."as for me," sighed the general, "i do not feel so well. i am worried, mr. rainsford. last night i detected traces of my old complaint."to rainsford's questioning glance the general said, "ennui. boredom."then, taking a second helping of crâpes suzette, the general explained: "the hunting was not good last night. the fellow lost his head. he made a straight trail that offered no problems at all. that's the trouble with these sailors; they have dull brains to begin with, and they do not know how to get about in the woods. they do excessively stupid and obvious things. it's most annoying. will you have another glass of chablis, mr. rainsford?""general," said rainsford firmly, "i wish to leave this island at once."the general raised his thickets of eyebrows; he seemed hurt. "but, my dear fellow," the general protested, "you've only just come. you've had no hunting--""i wish to go today," said rainsford. he saw the dead black eyes of the general on him, studying him. general zaroff's face suddenly brightened.he filled rainsford's glass with venerable chablis from a dusty bottle."tonight," said the general, "we will hunt--you and i."rainsford shook his head. "no, general," he said. "i will not hunt."the general shrugged his shoulders and delicately ate a hothouse grape. "as you wish, my friend," he said. "the choice rests entirely with you. but may i not venture to suggest that you will find my idea of sport more diverting than ivan's?"he nodded toward the corner to where the giant stood, scowling, his thick arms crossed on his hogshead of chest."you don't mean--" cried rainsford."my dear fellow," said the general, "have i not told you i always mean what i say about hunting? this is really an inspiration. i drink to a foeman worthy of my steel--at last." the general raised his glass, but rainsford sat staring at him."you'll find this game worth playing," the general said enthusiastically." your brain against mine. your woodcraft against mine. your strength and stamina against mine. outdoor chess! and the stake is not without value, eh?""and if i win--" began rainsford huskily."i'll cheerfully acknowledge myself defeat if i do not find you by midnight of the third day," said general zaroff. "my sloop will place you on the mainland near a town." the general read what rainsford was thinking."oh, you can trust me," said the cossack. "i will give you my word as a gentleman and a sportsman. of course you, in turn, must agree to say nothing of your visit here.""i'll agree to nothing of the kind," said rainsford."oh," said the general, "in that case--but why discuss that now? three days hence we can discuss it over a bottle of veuve cliquot, unless--"the general sipped his wine.then a businesslike air animated him. "ivan," he said to rainsford, "will supply you with hunting clothes, food, a knife. i suggest you wear moccasins; they leave a poorer trail. i suggest, too, that you avoid the big swamp in the southeast corner of the island. we call it death swamp. there's quicksand there. one foolish fellow tried it. the deplorable part of it was that lazarus followed him. you can imagine my feelings, mr. rainsford. i loved lazarus; he was the finest hound in my pack. well, i must beg you to excuse me now. i always' take a siesta after lunch. you'll hardly have time for a nap, i fear. you'll want to start, no doubt. i shall not follow till dusk. hunting at night is so much more exciting than by day, don't you think? au revoir, mr. rainsford, au revoir." general zaroff, with a deep, courtly bow, strolled from the room.from another door came ivan. under one arm he carried khaki hunting clothes, a haversack of food, a leather sheath containing a long-bladed hunting knife; his right hand rested on a cocked revolver thrust in the crimson sash about his waist.rainsford had fought his way through the bush for two hours. "i must keep my nerve. i must keep my nerve," he said through tight teeth.he had not been entirely clearheaded when the chateau gates snapped shut behind him. his whole idea at first was to put distance between himself and general zaroff; and, to this end, he had plunged along, spurred on by the sharp rowers of something very like panic. now he had got a grip on himself, had stopped, and was taking stock of himself and the situation. he saw that straight flight was futile; inevitably it would bring him face to face with the sea. he was in a picture with a frame of water, and his operations, clearly, must take place within that frame."i'll give him a trail to follow," muttered rainsford, and he struck off from the rude path he had been following into the trackless wilderness. he executed a series of intricate loops; he doubled on his trail again and again, recalling all the lore of the fox hunt, and all the dodges of the fox. night found him leg-weary, with hands and face lashed by the branches, on a thickly wooded ridge. he knew it would be insane to blunder on through the dark, even if he had the strength. his need for rest was imperative and he thought, "i have played the fox, now i must play the cat of the fable." a big tree with a thick trunk and outspread branches was near by, and, taking care to leave not the slightest mark, he climbed up into the crotch, and, stretching out on one of the broad limbs, after a fashion, rested. rest brought him new confidence and almost a feeling of security. even so zealous a hunter as general zaroff could not trace him there, he told himself; only the devil himself could follow that complicated trail through the jungle after dark. but perhaps the general was a devil--an apprehensive night crawled slowly by like a wounded snake and sleep did not visit rainsford, although the silence of a dead world was on the jungle. toward morning when a dingy gray was varnishing the sky, the cry of some startled bird focused rainsford's attention in that direction. something was coming through the bush, coming slowly, carefully, coming by the same winding way rainsford had come. he flattened himself down on the limb and, through a screen of leaves almost as thick as tapestry, he watched. . . .  that which was approaching was a man.it was general zaroff. he made his way along with his eyes fixed in utmost concentration on the ground before him. he paused, almost beneath the tree, dropped to his knees and studied the ground. rainsford's impulse was to hurl himself down like a panther, but he saw that the general's right hand held something metallic--a small automatic pistol.the hunter shook his head several times, as if he were puzzled. then he straightened up and took from his case one of his black cigarettes; its pungent incenselike smoke floated up to rainsford's nostrils.rainsford held his breath. the general's eyes had left the ground and were traveling inch by inch up the tree. rainsford froze there, every muscle tensed for a spring. but the sharp eyes of the hunter stopped before they reached the limb where rainsford lay; a smile spread over his brown face. very deliberately he blew a smoke ring into the air; then he turned his back on the tree and walked carelessly away, back along the trail he had come. the swish of the underbrush against his hunting boots grew fainter and fainter.the pent-up air burst hotly from rainsford's lungs. his first thought made him feel sick and numb. the general could follow a trail through the woods at night; he could follow an extremely difficult trail; he must have uncanny powers; only by the merest chance had the cossack failed to see his quarry.rainsford's second thought was even more terrible. it sent a shudder of cold horror through his whole being. why had the general smiled? why had he turned back?rainsford did not want to believe what his reason told him was true, but the truth was as evident as the sun that had by now pushed through the morning mists. the general was playing with him! the general was saving him for another day's sport! the cossack was the cat; he was the mouse. then it was that rainsford knew the full meaning of terror."i will not lose my nerve. i will not."he slid down from the tree, and struck off again into the woods. his face was set and he forced the machinery of his mind to function. three hundred yards from his hiding place he stopped where a huge dead tree leaned precariously on a smaller, living one. throwing off his sack of food, rainsford took his knife from its sheath and began to work with all his energy.the job was finished at last, and he threw himself down behind a fallen log a hundred feet away. he did not have to wait long. the cat was coming again to play with the mouse.following the trail with the sureness of a bloodhound came general zaroff. nothing escaped those searching black eyes, no crushed blade of grass, no bent twig, no mark, no matter how faint, in the moss. so intent was the cossack on his stalking that he was upon the thing rainsford had made before he saw it. his foot touched the protruding bough that was the trigger. even as he touched it, the general sensed his danger and leaped back with the agility of an ape. but he was not quite quick enough; the dead tree, delicately adjusted to rest on the cut living one, crashed down and struck the general a glancing blow on the shoulder as it fell; but for his alertness, he must have been smashed beneath it. he staggered, but he did not fall; nor did he drop his revolver. he stood there, rubbing his injured shoulder, and rainsford, with fear again gripping his heart, heard the general's mocking laugh ring through the jungle."rainsford," called the general, "if you are within sound of my voice, as i suppose you are, let me congratulate you. not many men know how to make a malay mancatcher. luckily for me i, too, have hunted in malacca. you are proving interesting, mr. rainsford. i am going now to have my wound dressed; it's only a slight one. but i shall be back. i shall be back."when the general, nursing his bruised shoulder, had gone, rainsford took up his flight again. it was flight now, a desperate, hopeless  flight, that carried him on for some hours. dusk came, then darkness, and still he pressed on. the ground grew softer under his moccasins; the vegetation grew ranker, denser; insects bit him savagely.then, as he stepped forward, his foot sank into the ooze. he tried to wrench it back, but the muck sucked viciously at his foot as if it were a giant leech. with a violent effort, he tore his feet loose. he knew where he was now. death swamp and its quicksand.his hands were tight closed as if his nerve were something tangible that someone in the darkness was trying to tear from his grip. the softness of the earth had given him an idea. he stepped back from the quicksand a dozen feet or so and, like some huge prehistoric beaver, he began to dig.rainsford had dug himself in in france when a second's delay meant death. that had been a placid pastime compared to his digging now. the pit grew deeper; when it was above his shoulders, he climbed out and from some hard saplings cut stakes and sharpened them to a fine point. these stakes he planted in the bottom of the pit with the points sticking up. with flying fingers he wove a rough carpet of weeds and branches and with it he covered the mouth of the pit. then, wet with sweat and aching with tiredness, he crouched behind the stump of a lightning-charred tree.he knew his pursuer was coming; he heard the padding sound of feet on the soft earth, and the night breeze brought him the perfume of the general's cigarette. it seemed to rainsford that the general was coming with unusual swiftness; he was not feeling his way along, foot by foot. rainsford, crouching there, could not see the general, nor could he see the pit. he lived a year in a minute. then he felt an impulse to cry aloud with joy, for he heard the sharp crackle of the breaking branches as the cover of the pit gave way; he heard the sharp scream of pain as the pointed stakes found their mark. he leaped up from his place of concealment. then he cowered back. three feet from the pit a man was standing, with an electric torch in his hand."you've done well, rainsford," the voice of the general called. "your burmese tiger pit has claimed one of my best dogs. again you score. i think, mr. rainsford, i'll see what you can do against my whole pack. i'm going home for a rest now. thank you for a most amusing evening."at daybreak rainsford, lying near the swamp, was awakened by a sound that made him know that he had new things to learn about fear. it was a distant sound, faint and wavering, but he knew it. it was the baying of a pack of hounds.rainsford knew he could do one of two things. he could stay where he was and wait. that was suicide. he could flee. that was postponing the inevitable. for a moment he stood there, thinking. an idea that held a wild chance came to him, and, tightening his belt, he headed away from the swamp.the baying of the hounds drew nearer, then still nearer, nearer, ever nearer. on a ridge rainsford climbed a tree. down a watercourse, not a quarter of a mile away, he could see the bush moving. straining his eyes, he saw the lean figure of general zaroff; just ahead of him rainsford made out another figure whose wide shoulders surged through the tall jungle weeds; it was the giant ivan, and he seemed pulled forward by some unseen force; rainsford knew that ivan must be holding the pack in leash.they would be on him any minute now. his mind worked frantically. he thought of a native trick he had learned in uganda. he slid down the tree. he caught hold of a springy young sapling and to it he fastened his hunting knife, with the blade pointing down the trail; with a bit of wild grapevine he tied back the sapling. then he ran for his life. the hounds raised their voices as they hit the fresh scent. rainsford knew now how an animal at bay feels.he had to stop to get his breath. the baying of the hounds stopped abruptly, and rainsford's heart stopped too. they must have reached the knife.he shinned excitedly up a tree and looked back. his pursuers had stopped. but the hope that was in rainsford's brain when he climbed died, for he saw in the shallow valley that general zaroff was still on his feet. but ivan was not. the knife, driven by the recoil of the springing tree, had not wholly failed.rainsford had hardly tumbled to the ground when the pack took up the cry again."nerve, nerve, nerve!" he panted, as he dashed along. a blue gap showed between the trees dead ahead. ever nearer drew the hounds. rainsford forced himself on toward that gap. he reached it. it was the shore of the sea. across a cove he could see the gloomy gray stone of the chateau. twenty feet below him the sea rumbled and hissed. rainsford hesitated. he heard the hounds. then he leaped far out into the sea. . . .when the general and his pack reached the place by the sea, the cossack stopped. for some minutes he stood regarding the blue-green expanse of water. he shrugged his shoulders. then he sat down, took a drink of brandy from a silver flask, lit a cigarette, and hummed a bit from madame butterfly.general zaroff had an exceedingly good dinner in his great paneled dining hall that evening. with it he had a bottle of pol roger and half a bottle of chambertin. two slight annoyances kept him from perfect enjoyment. one was the thought that it would be difficult to replace ivan; the other was that his quarry had escaped him; of course, the american hadn't played the game--so thought the general as he tasted his after-dinner liqueur. in his library he read, to soothe himself, from the works of marcus aurelius. at ten he went up to his bedroom. he was deliciously tired, he said to himself, as he locked himself in. there was a little moonlight, so, before turning on his light, he went to the window and looked down at the courtyard. he could see the great hounds, and he called, "better luck another time," to them. then he switched on the light.a man, who had been hiding in the curtains of the bed, was standing there."rainsford!" screamed the general. "how in god's name did you get here?""swam," said rainsford. "i found it quicker than walking through the jungle."the general sucked in his breath and smiled. "i congratulate you," he said. "you have won the game."rainsford did not smile. "i am still a beast at bay," he said, in a low, hoarse voice. "get ready, general zaroff."the general made one of his deepest bows. "i see," he said. "splendid! one of us is to furnish a repast for the hounds. the other will sleep in this very excellent bed. on guard, rainsford.". . .he had never slept in a better bed, rainsford decided.down below there was only a vast white undulating sea of cloud. above there was the sun, and the sun was white like the clouds, because it is never yellow when one looks at it from high in the air.he was still flying the spitfire. his right hand was on the stick, and he was working the rudder bar with his left leg alone. it was quite easy. the machine was flying well, and he knew what he was doing.everything is fine, he thought. i'm doing all right. i'm doing nicely. i know my way home. i'll be there in half an hour. when i land i shall taxi in and switch off my engine and i shall say, help me to get out, will you. i shall make my voice sound ordinary and natural and none of them will take any notice. then i shall say, someone help me to get out. i can't do it alone because i've lost one of my legs. they'll all laugh and think that i'm joking, and i shall say, all right, come and have a look, you unbelieving bastards. then yorky will climb up onto the wing and look inside. he'll probably be sick because of all the blood and the mess. i shall laugh and say, for god's sake, help me out.he glanced down again at his right leg. there was not much of it left. the cannon shell had taken him on the thigh, just above the knee, and now there was nothing but a great mess and a lot of blood. but there was no pain. when he looked down, he felt as though he were seeing something that did not belong to him. it had nothing to do with him. it was just a mess which happened to be there in the cockpit; something strange and unusual and rather interesting. it was like finding a dead cat on the sofa.he really felt fine, and because he still felt fine, he felt excited and unafraid.i won't even bother to call up on the radio for the blood wagon, he thought. it isn't necessary. and when i land i'll sit there quite normally and say, some of you fellows come and help me out, will you, because i've lost one of my legs. that will be funny. i'll laugh a little while i'm saying it; i'll say it calmly and slowly, and they'll think i'm joking. when yorky comes up onto the wing and gets sick, i'll say, yorky, you old son of a bitch, have you fixed my car yet? then when i get out i'll make my report and later i'll go up to london. i'll take that half bottle of whisky with me and i'll give it to bluey. we'll sit in her room and drink it. i'll get the water out of the bathroom tap. i won't say much until it's time to go to bed, then ill say, bluey, i've got a surprise for you. i lost a leg today. but i don't mind so long as you don't. it doesn't even hurt.we'll go everywhere in cars. i always hated walking, except when i walked down the street of the coppersmiths in bagdad, but i could go in a rickshaw. i could go home and chop wood, but the head always flies off the ax. hot water, that's what it needs; put it in the bath and make the handle swell. i chopped lots of wood last time i went home, and i put the ax in the bath. . . .then he saw the sun shining on the engine cowling of his machine. he saw the rivets in the metal, and he remembered where he was. he realized that he was no longer feeling good; that he was sick and giddy. his head kept falling forward onto his chest because his neck seemed no longer to have any strength. but he knew that he was flying the spitfire, and he could feel the handle of the stick between the fingers of his right hand.i'm going to pass out, he thought. any moment now i'm going to pass out.he looked at his altimeter. twenty-one thousand. to test himself   he tried to read the hundreds as well as the thousands. twenty-one thousand and what? as he looked the dial became blurred, and he could not even see the needle. he knew then that he must bail out; that there was not a second to lose, otherwise he would become unconscious. quickly, frantically, he tried to slide back the hood with his left hand, but he had not the strength. for a second he took his right hand off the stick, and with both hands he managed to push the hood back. the rush of cold air on his face seemed to help. he had a moment of great clearness, and his actions became orderly and precise. that is what happens with a good pilot. he took some quick deep breaths from his oxygen mask, and as he did so, he looked out over the side of the cockpit. down below there was only a vast white sea of cloud, and he realized that he did not know where he was.it'll be the channel, he thought. i'm sure to fall in the drink.he throttled back, pulled off his helmet, undid his straps, and pushed the stick hard over to the left. the spitfire dripped its port wing, and turned smoothly over onto its back. the pilot fell out.as he fell he opened his eyes, because he knew that he must not pass out before he had pulled the cord. on one side he saw the sun; on the other he saw the whiteness of the clouds, and as he fell, as he somersaulted in the air, the white clouds chased the sun and the sun chased the clouds. they chased each other in a small circle; they ran faster and faster, and there was the sun and the clouds and the clouds and the sun, and the clouds came nearer until suddenly there was no longer any sun, but only a great whiteness. the whole world was white, and there was nothing in it. it was so white that sometimes it looked black, and after a time it was either white or black, but mostly it was white. he watched it as it turned from white to black, and then back to white again, and the white stayed for a long time, but the black lasted only for a few seconds. he got into the habit of going to sleep during the white periods, and of waking up just in time to see the world when it was black. but the black was very quick. sometimes it was only a flash, like someone switching off the light, and switching it on again at once, and so whenever it was white, he dozed off.one day, when it was white, he put out a hand and he touched something. he took it between his fingers and crumpled it. for a time he lay there, idly letting the tips of his fingers play with the thing which they had touched. then slowly he opened his eyes, looked down at his hand, and saw that he was holding something which was white. it was the edge of a sheet. he knew it was a sheet because he could see the texture of the material and the stitchings on the hem. he screwed up his eyes, and opened them again quickly. this time he saw the room. he saw the bed in which he was lying; he saw the grey walls and the door and the green curtains over the window. there were some roses on the table by his bed.then he saw the basin on the table near the roses. it was a white enamel basin, and beside it there was a small medicine glass.this is a hospital, he thought. i am in a hospital. but he could remember nothing. he lay back on his pillow, looking at the ceiling and wondering what had happened. he was gazing at the smooth greyness of the ceiling which was so clean and gray, and then suddenly he saw a fly walking upon it. the sight of this fly, the suddenness of seeing this small black speck on a sea of gray, brushed the surface of his brain, and quickly, in that second, he remembered everything. he remembered the spitfire and he remembered the altimeter showing twenty-one thousand feet. he remembered the pushing back of the hood with both hands, and he remembered the bailing out. he remembered his leg.it seemed all right now. he looked down at the end of the bed, but he could not tell. he put one hand underneath the bedclothes and felt for his knees. he found one of them, but when he felt for the other, his hand touched something which was soft and covered in bandages.just then the door opened and a nurse came in."hello," she said. "so you've waked up at last."she was not good-looking, but she was large and clean. she was between thirty and forty and she had fair hair. more than that he did not notice."where am i?""you're a lucky fellow. you landed in a wood near the beach. you're in   brighton. they brought you in two days ago, and now you're all fixed up. you look fine.""i've lost a leg," he said."that's nothing. we'll get you another one. now you must go to sleep. the doctor will be coming to see you in about an hour." she picked up the basin and the medicine glass and went out.but he did not sleep. he wanted to keep his eyes open because he was frightened that if he shut them again everything would go away. he lay looking at the ceiling. the fly was still there. it was very energetic. it would run forward very fast for a few inches, then it would stop. then it would run forward again, stop, run forward, stop, and every now and then it would take off and buzz around viciously in small circles. it always landed back in the same place on the ceiling and started running and stopping all over again. he watched it for so long that after a while it was no longer a fly, but only a black speck upon a sea of gray, and he was still watching it when the nurse opened the door, and stood aside while the doctor came in. he was an army  doctor, a major, and he had some last war ribbons on his chest. he was bald and small, but he had a cheerful face and kind eyes."well, well," he said. "so you've decided to wake up at last. how are you feeling?""i feel all right.""that's the stuff. you'll be up and about in no time."the doctor took his wrist to feel his pulse."by the way," he said, "some of the lads from your squadron were ringing up and asking about you. they wanted to come along and see you, but i said that they'd better wait a day or two. told them you were all right, and that they could come and see you a little later on. just lie quiet and take it easy for a bit. got something to read?" he glanced at the table with the roses. "no. well, nurse will look after you. she'll get you anything you want." with that he waved his hand and went out, followed by the large clean nurse.when they had gone, he lay back and looked at the ceiling again. the fly was still there and as he lay watching it he heard the noise of an airplane in the distance. he lay listening to the sound of its engines. it was a long way away. i wonder what it is, he thought. let me see if i can place it. suddenly he jerked his head sharply to one side. anyone who has been bombed can tell the noise of a junkers 88. they can tell most other german bombers for that matter, but especially a junkers 88. the engines seem to sing a duet. there is a deep vibrating bass voice and with it there is a high pitched tenor. it is the singing of the tenor which makes the sound of a ju-88 something which one cannot mistake.he lay listening to the noise, and he felt quite certain about what it was. but where were the sirens, and where the guns? that german pilot certainly had a nerve coming near brighton alone in daylight.the aircraft was always far away, and soon the noise faded away into the distance. later on there was another. this one, too, was far away, but there was the same deep undulating bass and the high singing tenor, and there was no mistaking it. he had heard that noise every day during the battle.he was puzzled. there was a bell on the table by the bed. he reached out his hand and rang it. he heard the noise of footsteps down the corridor, and the nurse came in."nurse, what were those airplanes?""i'm sure i don't know. i didn't hear them. probably fighters or bombers. i expect they were returning from france. why, what's the matter?""they were ju-88's. i'm sure they were ju-88's. i know the sound of the engines. there were two of them. what were they doing over here?"the nurse came up to the side of his bed and began to straighten out the sheets and tuck them in under the mattress."gracious me, what things you imagine. you mustn't worry about a thing like that. would you like me to get you something to read?""no, thank you."she patted his pillow and brushed back the hair from his forehead with her hand."they never come over in daylight any longer. you know that. they were probably lancasters or flying fortresses.""nurse.""yes.""could i have a cigarette?""why certainly you can."she went out and came back almost at once with a packet of players and some matches. she handed one to him and when he had put it in his mouth, she struck a match and lit it."if you want me again," she said, "just ring the bell," and she went out.once toward evening he heard the noise of another aircraft. it was far away, but even so he knew that it was a single-engined machine. but he could not place it. it was going fast; he could tell that. but it wasn't a spit, and it wasn't a hurricane fighter air craft. it did not sound like an american engine either. they make more noise. he did not know what it was, and it worried him greatly. perhaps i am very ill, he thought. perhaps i am imagining things. perhaps i am a little delirious. i simply do not know what to think.that evening the nurse came in with a basin of hot water and began to wash him."well," she said, "i hope you don't still think that we're being bombed."she had taken off his pajama top and was soaping his right arm with a flannel. he did not answer.she rinsed the flannel in the water, rubbed more soap on it, and began to wash his chest."you're looking fine this evening," she said. "they operated on you as soon as you came in. they did a marvelous job. you'll be all right. i've  got a brother in the rafhe said, "i went to school in brighton."she looked up quickly. "well, that's fine," she said. "i expect you'll know some people in the town.""yes," he said, "i know quite a few."she had finished washing his chest and arms, and now she turned back the bedclothes, so that his left leg was uncovered. she did it in such a way that his bandaged stump remained under the sheets. she undid the cord of his pajama trousers and took them off. there was no trouble because they had cut off the right trouser leg, so that it could not interfere with the bandages. she began to wash his left leg and the rest of his body. this was the first time he had had a bed bath, and he was embarrassed. she laid a towel under his leg, and she was washing his foot with the flannel. she said, "this wretched soap won't lather at all. it's the water. it's as hard as nails."he said, "none of the soap is very good now and, of course, with hard water it's hopeless." as he said it he remembered something. he remembered the baths which he used to take at school in brighton, in the long stone-floored bathroom which had four baths in a room. he remembered how the water was so soft that you had to take a shower afterwards to get all the soap off your body, and he remembered how the foam used to float on the surface of the water, so that you could not see your legs underneath. he remembered that sometimes they were given calcium tablets because the school doctor used to say that soft water was bad for the teeth."in brighton," he said, "the water isn't . . ."he did not finish the sentence. something had occurred to him; something so fantastic and absurd that for a moment he felt like telling the nurse about it and having a good laugh.she looked up. "the water isn't what?" she said."nothing," he answered. "i was dreaming.she rinsed the flannel in the basin, wiped the soap off his leg, and dried him with a towel."it's nice to be washed," he said. "i feel better." he was feeling his face with his hands. "i need a shave.""we'll do that tomorrow," she said. "perhaps you can do it yourself then."that night he could not sleep. he lay awake thinking of the junkers 88's and of the hardness of the water. he could think of nothing else. they were ju-88's, he said to himself. i know they were. and yet it is not possible, because they would not be flying around so low over here in broad daylight. i know that it is true, and yet i know that it is impossible. perhaps i am ill. perhaps i am behaving like a fool and do not know what i am doing or saying. perhaps i am delirious. for a long time he lay awake thinking these things, and once he sat up in bed and said aloud, "i will prove that i am not crazy. i will make a little speech about something complicated and intellectual. i will talk about what to do with germany after the war." but before he had time to begin, he was asleep.he woke just as the first light of day was showing through the slit in the curtains over the window. the room was still dark, but he could tell that it was already beginning to get light outside. he lay looking at the grey light which was showing through the slit in the curtain, and as he lay there he remembered the day before. he remembered the junkers 88's and the hardness of the water; he remembered the large pleasant nurse and the kind doctor, and now the small grain of doubt took root in his mind and it began to grow.he looked around the room. the nurse had taken the roses out the night before, and there was nothing except the table with a packet of cigarettes, a box of matches and an ash tray. otherwise, it was bare. it was no longer warm or friendly. it was not even comfortable. it was cold and empty and very quiet.slowly the grain of doubt grew, and with it came fear, a light, dancing fear that warned but did not frighten; the kind of fear that one gets not because one is afraid, but because one feels that there is something wrong. quickly the doubt and the fear grew so that he became restless and angry, and when he touched his forehead with his hand, he found that it was damp with sweat. he knew then that he must do something; that he must find some way of proving to himself that he was either right or wrong, and he looked up and saw again the window and the green curtains. from where he lay, that window was right in front of him, but it was fully ten yards away. somehow he must reach it and look out. the idea became an obsession with him, and soon he could think of nothing except the window. but what about his leg? he put his hand underneath the bedclothes and felt the thick bandaged stump which was all that was left on the right-hand side. it seemed all right. it didn't hurt. but it would not be easy.he sat up. then he pushed the bedclothes aside and put his left leg on the floor. slowly, carefully, he swung his body over until he had both hands on the floor as well; and then he was out of bed, kneeling on the carpet. he looked at the stump. it was very short and thick, covered with bandages. it was beginning to hurt and he could feel it throbbing. he wanted to collapse, lie down on the carpet and do nothing, but he knew that he must go on.with two arms and one leg, he crawled over towards the window. he would reach forward as far as he could with his arms, then he would give a little jump and slide his left leg along after them. each time he did, it jarred his wound so that he gave a soft grunt of pain, but he continued to crawl across the floor on two hands and one knee. when he got to the window he reached up, and one at a time he placed both hands on the sill. slowly he raised himself up until he was standing on his left leg. then quickly he pushed aside the curtains and looked out.he saw a small house with a gray tiled roof standing alone beside a narrow lane, and immediately behind it there was a plowed field. in front of the house there was an untidy garden, and there was a green hedge separating the garden from the lane. he was looking at the hedge when he saw the sign. it was just a piece of board nailed to the top of a short pole, and because the hedge had not been trimmed for a long time, the branches had grown out around the sign so that it seemed almost as though it had been placed in the middle of the hedge. there was something written on the board with white paint, and he pressed his head against the glass of the window, trying to read what it said. the first letter was a g, he could see that. the second was an a, and the third was an r. one after another he managed to see what the letters were. there were three words, and slowly  he spelled the letters out aloud to himself as he managed to read them. g-a-r-d-e a-u c-h-i-e-n. garde au chien. that is what it said.he stood there balancing on one leg and holding tightly to the edges of the window sill with his hands, staring at the sign and at the whitewashed lettering of the words. for a moment he could think of nothing at all. he stood there looking at the sign, repeating the words over and over to himself, and then slowly he began to realize the full meaning of the thing. he looked up at the cottage and at the plowed field. he looked at the small orchard on the left of the cottage and he looked at the green countryside beyond. "so this is france," he said. "i am france."now the throbbing in his right thigh was very great. it felt as though someone was pounding the end of his stump with a hammer, and suddenly the pain became so intense that it affected his head and for a moment he thought he was going to fall. quickly he knelt down again, crawled back to the bed and hoisted himself in. he pulled the bedclothes over himself and lay back on the pillow, exhausted. he could still think of nothing at all except the small sign by the hedge, and the plowed field and the orchard. it was the words on the sign that he could not forget.it was some time before the nurse came in. she came carrying a basin of hot water and she said, "good morning, how are you today?"he said, "good morning, nurse."the pain was still great under the bandages, but he did not wish to tell this woman anything. he looked at her as she busied herself with getting the washing things ready. he looked at her more carefully now. her hair was very fair. she was tall and big-boned, and her face seemed pleasant. but there was something a little uneasy about her eyes. they were never still. they never looked at anything for more than a moment and they moved too quickly from one place to another in the room. there was something about her movements also. they were too sharp and nervous to go well with the casual manner in which she spoke.she set down the basin, took off his pajama top and began to wash him."did you sleep well?""yes.""good," she said. she was washing his arms and his chest."i believe there's someone coming down to see you from the air ministry after breakfast," she went on. "they want a report or something. i expect you know all about it. how you got shot down and all that. i won't let him stay long, so don't worry."he did not answer. she finished washing him, and gave him a toothbrush and some tooth powder. he brushed his teeth, rinsed his mouth and spat the water out into the basin.later she brought him his breakfast on a tray, but he did not want to eat. he was still feeling weak and sick, and he wished only to lie still and think about what had happened. and there was a sentence running through his head. it was a sentence which johnny, the intelligence officer of his squadron, always repeated to the pilots every day before they went out. he could see johnny now, leaning against the wall of the dispersal hut with his pipe in his hand, saying, "and if they get you, don't forget, just your name, rank and number. nothing else. for god's sake, say nothing else.""there you are," she said as she put the tray on his lap. "i've got you an egg. can you manage all right?""yes."she stood beside the bed. "are you feeling all right?""yes.""good. if you want another egg i might be able to get you one.""this is all right.""well, just ring the bell if you want any more." and she went out.he had just finished eating, when the nurse came in again.she said, "wing commander roberts is here. i've told him that he can only stay for a few minutes."she beckoned with her hand and the wing commander came in."sorry to bother you like this," he said.he was an ordinary raf officer, dressed in a uniform which was a little shabby, and he wore wings and a dfc. he was fairly tall and thin with plenty of black hair. his teeth, which were irregular and widely spaced, stuck out a little even when he closed his mouth. as he spoke he took a printed form and a pencil from his pocket, and he pulled up a chair and sat down."how are you feeling?"there was no answer."tough luck about your leg. i know how you feel. i hear you put up a fine show before they got you."the man in the bed was lying quite still, watching the man in the chair.the man in the chair said, "well, let's get this stuff over. i'm afraid you'll have to answer a few questions so that i can fill in this combat report. let me see now, first of all, what was your squadron?"the man in the bed did not move. he looked straight at the wing commander and he said, "my name is peter williamson. my rank is squadron leader and my number is nine seven two four five seven."the room was warm and clean, the curtains drawn, the two table lamps alight-hers and the one by the empty chair opposite. on the sideboard behind her, two tall glasses, soda water, whiskey. fresh ice cubes in the thermos bucket.mary maloney was waiting for her husband to come home from work.now and again she would glance up at the clock, but without anxiety, merely to please herself with the thought that each minute gone by made it nearer the time when he would come. there was a slow smiling air about her, and about everything she did. the drop of a head as she bent over her sewing was curiously tranquil. her skin--for this was her sixth month with child--had acquired a wonderful translucent quality, the mouth was soft, and the eyes, with their new placid look, seemed larger darker than before. when the clock said ten minutes to five, she began to listen, and a few moments later, punctually as always, she heard the tires on the gravel outside, and the car door slamming, the footsteps passing the window, the key turning in the lock. she laid aside her sewing, stood up, and went forward to kiss him as he came in."hullo darling," she said."hullo darling," he answered.she took his coat and hung it in the closet. then she walked over and made the drinks, a strongish one for him, a weak one for herself; and soon she was back again in her chair with the sewing, and he in the other, opposite, holding the tall glass with both hands, rocking it so the ice cubes tinkled against the side.for her, this was always a blissful time of day. she knew he didn't want to speak much until the first drink was finished, and she, on her side, was content to sit quietly, enjoying his company after the long hours alone in the house. she loved to luxuriate in the presence of this man, and to feel-almost as a sunbather feels the sun-that warm male glow that came out of him to her when they were alone together. she loved him for the way he sat loosely in a chair, for the way he came in a door, or moved slowly across the room with long strides. she loved intent, far look in his eyes when they rested in her, the funny shape of the mouth, and especially the way he remained silent about his tiredness, sitting still with himself until the whiskey had taken some of it away."tired darling?""yes," he said. "i'm tired," and as he spoke, he did an unusual thing. he lifted his glass and drained it in one swallow although there was still half of it, at least half of it left.. she wasn't really watching him, but she knew what he had done because she heard the ice cubes falling back against the bottom of the empty glass when he lowered his arm. he paused a moment, leaning forward in the chair, then he got up and went slowly over to fetch himself another."i'll get it!" she cried, jumping up."sit down," he said.when he came back, she noticed that the new drink was dark amber with the quantity of whiskey in it."darling, shall i get your slippers?""no."she watched him as he began to sip the dark yellow drink, and she could see little oily swirls in the liquid because it was so strong."i think it's a shame," she said, "that when a policeman gets to be as senior as you, they keep him walking about on his feet all day long."he didn't answer, so she bent her head again and went on with her sewing; but each time he lifted the drink to his lips, she heard the ice cubes clinking against the side of the glass."darling," she said. "would you like me to get you some cheese? i haven't made any supper because it's thursday.""no," he said."if you're too tired to eat out," she went on, "it's still not too late. there's plenty of meat and stuff in the freezer, and you can have it right here and not even move out of the chair."her eyes waited on him for an answer, a smile, a little nod, but he made no sign."anyway," she went on, "i'll get you some cheese and crackers first.""i don't want it," he said.she moved uneasily in her chair, the large eyes still watching his face. "but you must eat! i'll fix it anyway, and then you can have it or not, as you like."she stood up and placed her sewing on the table by the lamp."sit down," he said. "just for a minute, sit down."it wasn't till then that she began to get frightened."go on," he said. "sit down."she lowered herself back slowly into the chair, watching him all the time with those large, bewildered eyes. he had finished the second drink and was staring down into the glass, frowning."listen," he said. "i've got something to tell you.""what is it, darling? what's the matter?"he had now become absolutely motionless, and he kept his head down so that the light from the lamp beside him fell across the upper part of his face, leaving the chin and mouth in shadow. she noticed there was a little muscle moving near the corner of his left eye."this is going to be a bit of a shock to you, i'm afraid," he said. "but i've thought about it a good deal and i've decided the only thing to do is tell you right away. i hope you won't blame me too much."and he told her. it didn't take long, four or five minutes at most, and she say very still through it all, watching him with a kind of dazed horror as he went further and further away from her with each word."so there it is," he added. "and i know it's kind of a bad time to be telling you, bet there simply wasn't any other way. of course i'll give you money and see you're looked after. but there needn't really be any fuss. i hope not anyway. it wouldn't be very good for my job."her first instinct was not to believe any of it, to reject it all. it occurred to her that perhaps he hadn't even spoken, that she herself had imagined the whole thing. maybe, if she went about her business and acted as though she hadn't been listening, then later, when she sort of woke up again, she might find none of it had ever happened."i'll get the supper," she managed to whisper, and this time he didn't stop her.when she walked across the room she couldn't feel her feet touching the floor. she couldn't feel anything at all- except a slight nausea and a desire to vomit. everything was automatic now-down the steps to the cellar, the light switch, the deep freeze, the hand inside the cabinet taking hold of the first object it met. she lifted it out, and looked at it. it was wrapped in paper, so she took off the paper and looked at it again.a leg of lamb.all right then, they would have lamb for supper. she carried it upstairs, holding the thin bone-end of it with both her hands, and as she went through the living-room, she saw him standing over by the window with his back to her, and she stopped."for god's sake," he said, hearing her, but not turning round. "don't make supper for me. i'm going out."at that point, mary maloney simply walked up behind him and without any pause she swung the big frozen leg of lamb high in the air and brought it down as hard as she could on the back of his head.she might just as well have hit him with a steel club.she stepped back a pace, waiting, and the funny thing was that he remained standing there for at least four or five seconds, gently swaying. then he crashed to the carpet.the violence of the crash, the noise, the small table overturning, helped bring her out of he shock. she came out slowly, feeling cold and surprised, and she stood for a while blinking at the body, still holding the ridiculous piece of meat tight with both hands.all right, she told herself. so i've killed him.it was extraordinary, now, how clear her mind became all of a sudden. she began thinking very fast. as the wife of a detective, she knew quite well what the penalty would be. that was fine. it made no difference to her. in fact, it would be a relief. on the other hand, what about the child? what were the laws about murderers with unborn children? did they kill then both-mother and child? or did they wait until the tenth month? what did they do?mary maloney didn't know. and she certainly wasn't prepared to take a chance.she carried the meat into the kitchen, placed it in a pan, turned the oven on high, and shoved t inside. then she washed her hands and ran upstairs to the bedroom. she sat down before the mirror, tidied her hair, touched up her lops and face. she tried a smile. it came out rather peculiar. she tried again."hullo sam," she said brightly, aloud.the voice sounded peculiar too."i want some potatoes please, sam. yes, and i think a can of peas."that was better. both the smile and the voice were coming out better now. she rehearsed it several times more. then she ran downstairs, took her coat, went out the back door, down the garden, into the street.it wasn't six o'clock yet and the lights were still on in the grocery shop."hullo sam," she said brightly, smiling at the man behind the counter."why, good evening, mrs. maloney. how're you?""i want some potatoes please, sam. yes, and i think a can of peas."the man turned and reached up behind him on the shelf for the peas."patrick's decided he's tired and doesn't want to eat out tonight," she told him. "we usually go out thursdays, you know, and now he's caught me without any vegetables in the house.""then how about meat, mrs. maloney?""no, i've got meat, thanks. i got a nice leg of lamb from the freezer.""oh.""i don't know much like cooking it frozen, sam, but i'm taking a chance on it this time. you think it'll be all right?""personally," the grocer said, "i don't believe it makes any difference. you want these idaho potatoes?""oh yes, that'll be fine. two of those.""anything else?" the grocer cocked his head on one side, looking at her pleasantly. "how about afterwards? what you going to give him for afterwards?""well-what would you suggest, sam?"the man glanced around his shop. "how about a nice big slice of cheesecake? i know he likes that.""perfect," she said. "he loves it."and when it was all wrapped and she had paid, she put on her brightest smile and said, "thank you, sam. goodnight.""goodnight, mrs. maloney. and thank you."and now, she told herself as she hurried back, all she was doing now, she was returning home to her husband and he was waiting for his supper; and she must cook it good, and make it as tasty as possible because the poor man was tired; and if, when she entered the house, she happened to find anything unusual, or tragic, or terrible, then naturally it would be a shock and she'd become frantic with grief and horror. mind you, she wasn't expecting to find anything. she was just going home with the vegetables.  mrs. patrick maloney going home with the vegetables on thursday evening to cook supper for her husband.that's the way, she told herself. do everything right and natural. keep things absolutely natural and there'll be no need for any acting at all.therefore, when she entered the kitchen by the back door, she was humming a little tune to herself and smiling."patrick!" she called. "how are you, darling?"she put the parcel down on the table and went through into the living room; and when she saw him lying there on the floor with his legs doubled up and one arm twisted back underneath his body, it really was rather a shock. all the old love and longing for him welled up inside her, and she ran over to him, knelt down beside him, and began to cry her heart out. it was easy. no acting was necessary.a few minutes later she got up and went to the phone. she know the number of the police station, and when the man at the other end answered, she cried to him, "quick! come quick! patrick's dead!""who's speaking?""mrs. maloney. mrs. patrick maloney.""you mean patrick maloney's dead?""i think so," she sobbed. "he's lying on the floor and i think he's dead.""be right over," the man said.the car came very quickly, and when she opened the front door, two policeman walked in. she know them both-she know nearly all the man at that precinct-and she fell right into a chair, then went over to join the other one, who was called o'malley, kneeling by the body."is he dead?" she cried."i'm afraid he is. what happened?"briefly, she told her story about going out to the grocer and coming back to find him on the floor. while she was talking, crying and talking, noonan discovered a small patch of congealed blood on the dead man's head. he showed it to o'malley who got up at once and hurried to the phone.soon, other men began to come into the house. first a doctor, then two detectives, one of whom she know by name. later, a police photographer arrived and took pictures, and a man who know about fingerprints. there was a great deal of whispering and muttering beside the corpse, and the detectives kept asking her a lot of questions. but they always treated her kindly. she told her story again, this time right from the beginning, when patrick had come in, and she was sewing, and he was tired, so tired he hadn't wanted to go out for supper. she told how she'd put the meat in the oven-"it's there now, cooking"- and how she'd slopped out to the grocer for vegetables, and come back to find him lying on the floor.which grocer?" one of the detectives asked.she told him, and he turned and whispered something to the other detective who immediately went outside into the street.in fifteen minutes he was back with a page of notes, and there was more whispering, and through her sobbing she heard a few of the whispered phrases-"...acted quite normal...very cheerful...wanted to give him a good supper...peas...cheesecake...impossible that she..."after a while, the photographer and the doctor departed and two other men came in and took the corpse away on a stretcher. then the fingerprint man went away. the two detectives remained, and so did the two policeman. they were exceptionally nice to her, and jack noonan asked if she wouldn't rather go somewhere else, to her sister's house perhaps, or to his own wife who would take care of her and put her up for the night.no, she said. she didn't feel she could move even a yard at the moment. would they mind awfully of she stayed just where she was until she felt better. she didn't feel too good at the moment, she really didn't.then hadn't she better lie down on the bed? jack noonan asked.no, she said. she'd like to stay right where she was, in this chair. a little later, perhaps, when she felt better, she would move.so they left her there while they went about their business, searching the house. occasionally on of the detectives asked her another question. sometimes jack noonan spoke at her gently as he passed by. her husband, he told her, had been killed by a blow on the back of the head administered with a heavy blunt instrument, almost certainly a large piece of metal. they were looking for the weapon. the murderer may have taken it with him, but on the other hand he may have thrown it away or hidden it somewhere on the premises."it's the old story," he said. "get the weapon, and you've got the man."later, one of the detectives came up and sat beside her. did she know, he asked, of anything in the house that could've been used as the weapon? would she mind having a look around to see if anything was missing-a very big spanner, for example, or a heavy metal vase.they didn't have any heavy metal vases, she said."or a big spanner?"she didn't think they had a big spanner. but there might be some things like that in the garage.the search went on. she knew that there were other policemen in the garden all around the house. she could hear their footsteps on the gravel outside, and sometimes she saw a flash of a torch through a chink in the curtains. it began to get late, nearly nine she noticed by the clock on the mantle. the four men searching the rooms seemed to be growing weary, a trifle exasperated."jack," she said, the next tome sergeant noonan went by. "would you mind giving me a drink?""sure i'll give you a drink. you mean this whiskey?""yes please. but just a small one. it might make me feel better."he handed her the glass."why don't you have one yourself," she said. "you must be awfully tired. please do. you've been very good to me.""well," he answered. "it's not strictly allowed, but i might take just a drop to keep me going."one by one the others came in and were persuaded to take a little nip of whiskey. they stood around rather awkwardly with the drinks in their hands, uncomfortable in her presence, trying to say consoling things to her. sergeant noonan wandered into the kitchen, come out quickly and said, "look, mrs. maloney. you know that oven of yours is still on, and the meat still inside.""oh dear me!" she cried. "so it is!""i better turn it off for you, hadn't i?""will you do that, jack. thank you so much."when the sergeant returned the second time, she looked at him with her large, dark tearful eyes. "jack noonan," she said."yes?""would you do me a small favor-you and these others?""we can try, mrs. maloney.""well," she said. "here you all are, and good friends of dear patrick's too, and helping to catch the man who killed him. you must be terrible hungry by now because it's long past your suppertime, and i know patrick would never forgive me, god bless his soul, if i allowed you to remain in his house without offering you decent hospitality. why don't you eat up that lamb that's in the oven. it'll be cooked just right by now.""wouldn't dream of it," sergeant noonan said."please," she begged. "please eat it. personally i couldn't tough a thing, certainly not what's been in the house when he was here. but it's all right for you. it'd be a favor to me if you'd eat it up. then you can go on with your work again afterwards."there was a good deal of hesitating among the four policemen, but they were clearly hungry, and in the end they were persuaded to go into the kitchen and help themselves. the woman stayed where she was, listening to them speaking among themselves, their voices thick and sloppy because their mouths were full of meat."have some more, charlie?""no. better not finish it.""she wants us to finish it. she said so. be doing her a favor.""okay then. give me some more.""that's the hell of a big club the gut must've used to hit poor patrick," one of them was saying. "the doc says his skull was smashed all to pieces just like from a sledgehammer.""that's why it ought to be easy to find.""exactly what i say.""whoever done it, they're not going to be carrying a thing like that around with them longer than they need."one of them belched."personally, i think it's right here on the premises.""probably right under our very noses. what you think, jack?"and in the other room, mary maloney began to giggle.it was getting on toward six o'clock so i thought i'd buy myself a beer and go out and sit in a deck chair by the swimming pool and have a little evening sun.i went to the bar and got the beer and carried it outside and wandered down the garden toward the pool.it was a fine garden with lawns and beds of azaleas and tall coconut palms, and the wind was blowing strongly through the tops of the palm trees making the leaves hiss and crackle as though they were on fire. i could see the clusters of big brown nuts handing down underneath the leaves.there were plenty of deck chairs around the swimming pool and there were white tables and huge brightly colored umbrellas and sunburned men and women sitting around in bathing suits. in the pool itself there were three or four girls and about a dozen boys, all splashing about and making a lot of noise and throwing a large rubber ball at one another.i stood watching them. the girls were english girls from the hotel. the boys i didn't know about, but they sounded american and i thought they were probably naval cadets who'd come ashore from the u.s. naval training vessel which had arrived in the harbor that morning.i went over and sat down under a yellow umbrella where there were four empty seats, and i poured my beer and settled back comfortably with a cigarette.it was very pleasant sitting there in the sunshine with beer and a cigarette. it was pleasant to sit and watch the bathers splashing about in the green water.the american sailors were getting on nicely with the english girls. they'd reached the stage where they were diving under the water and tipping them up by their legs.just then i noticed a small, oldish man walking briskly around the edge of the pool. he was immaculately dressed in a white suit and he walked very quickly with little bouncing strides, pushing himself high up onto his toes with each step. he had on a large creamy panama hat, and he came bouncing along the side of the pool, looking at the people and the chairs.he stopped beside me and smiled, showing two rows of very small, uneven teeth, slightly tarnished. i smiled back."excuse pleess, but may i sit here?""certainly," i said. "go ahead."he bobbed around to the back of the chair and inspected it for safety, then he sat down and crossed his legs. his white buckskin shows had little holes punched all over them for ventilation."a fine evening," he said. "they are all evenings fine here in jamaica." i couldn't tell if the accent were italian or spanish, but i felt fairly sure he was some sort of a south american. and old too, when you saw him close. probably around sixty-eight or seventy."yes," i said. "it is wonderful here, isn't it.""and who, might i ask are all dese? dese is no hotel people." he was pointing at the bathers in the pool."i think they're american sailors," i told him. "they're americans who are learning to be sailors.""of course dey are americans. who else in de world is going to make as much noise as dat? you are not american, no?""no," i said. "i am not."suddenly one of the american cadets was standing in front of us. he was dripping wet from the pool and one of the english girls was standing there with him."are these chairs taken?" he said."no," i answered."mind if i sit down?""go ahead.""thanks," he said. he had a towel in his hand and when he sat down he unrolled it and produced a pack of cigarettes and a lighter. he offered the cigarettes to the girl and she refused; then he offered them to me and i took one. the little man said, "tank you, no, but i tink i have a cigar." he pulled out a crocodile case and got himself a cigar, then he produced a knife which had a small scissors in it and he snipped the end off the cigar."here, let me give you a light." the american boy held up his lighter."dat will not work in dis wind.""sure, it'll work. it always works."the little man removed his unlighted cigar from his mouth, cocked his head on one side and looked at the boy."all-ways?" he said softly."sure, it never fails. not with me anyway."the little man's head was still cocked over on one side and he was still watching the boy. "well, well. so you say dis famous lighter it never fails. iss dat you say?""sure," the boy said. "that's right." he was about nineteen or twenty with a long freckled face and a rather sharp birdlike nose. his chest was not very sunburned and there were freckles there too, and a few wisps of pale-reddish hair. he was holding the lighter in his right hand, ready to flip the wheel. "it never fails," he said, smiling now because he was purposely exaggerating his little boast. "i promise you it never fails.""one momint, pleess." the hand that held the cigar came up high, palm outward, as though it were stopping traffic. "now juss one momint." he had a curiously soft, toneless voice and he kept looking at the boy all the time."shall we not perhaps make a little bet on dat?" he smiled at the boy. "shall we not make a little bet on whether your lighter lights?""sure, i'll bet," the boy said. "why not?""you like to bet?""sure, i'll always bet."the man paused and examined his cigar, and i must say i didn't much like the way he was behaving. it seemed he was already trying to make something out of this, and to embarrass the boy, and at the same time i had the feeling he was relishing a private little secret all his own.he looked up again at the boy and said slowly, "i like to bet, too. why we don't have a good bet on dis ting? a good big bet?"now wait a minute," the boy said. "i can't do that. but i'll bet you a dollar, or whatever it is over here-some shillings, i guess."the little man waved his hand again. "listen to me. now we have some fun. we make a bet. den we go up to my room here in de hotel where iss no wind and i bet you you cannot light dis famous lighter of yours ten times running without missing once.""i'll bet i can," the boy said."all right. good. we make a bet, yes?""sure. i'll bet you a buck.""no, no. i make you very good bet. i am rich man and i am sporting man also. listen to me. outside de hotel iss my car. iss very fine car. american car from your country. cadillac-""hey, now. wait a minute." the boy leaned back in his deck chair and he laughed. "i can't put up that sort of property. this is crazy.""not crazy at all. you strike lighter successfully ten times running and cadillac is yours. you like to have dis cadillac, yes?""sure, i'd like to have a cadillac." the boy was still grinning."all right. fine. we make a bet and i put up my cadillac.""and what do i put up?""the little man carefully removed the red band from his still unlighted cigar. "i never ask you, my friend, to bet something you cannot afford. you understand?""then what do i bet?""i make it very easy for you, yes?""okay. you make it easy.""some small ting you can afford to give away, and if you did happen to lose it you would not feel too bad. right?""such as what?""such as, perhaps, de little finger of your left hand.""my what! the boy stopped grinning."yes. why not? you win, you take de car. you looss, i take de finger.""i don't get it. how d'you mean, you take the finger?""i chop it off.""jumping jeepers! that's a crazy bet. i think i'll just make it a dollar."the man leaned back, spread out his hands palms upward and gave a tiny contemptuous shrug of the shoulders. "well, well, well," he said. "i do not understand. you say it lights but you will not bet. den we forget it, yes?"the boy sat quite still, staring at the bathers in the pool. then he remembered suddenly he hadn't lighted his cigarette. he put it between his lips, cupped his hands around the lighter and flipped the wheel. the wick lighted and burned with a small, steady, yellow flame and the way he held his hands the wind didn't get to it at all."could i have a light, too?" i said."gee, i'm sorry. i forgot you didn't have one."i held out my hand for the lighter, but he stood up and came over to do it for me."thank you," i said, and he returned to his seat."you having a good time?" i asked."fine," he answered. "it's pretty nice here."there was a silence then, and i could see that the little man has succeeded in disturbing the boy with his absurd proposal. he was sitting there very still, and it was obvious that a small tension was beginning to build up inside him. then he started shifting about in his seat, and rubbing his chest, and stroking the back of his neck, and finally he placed both hands on his knees and began tapping his fingers against his knee-caps. soon he was tapping with one of his feet as well."now just let me check up on this bet of yours," he said at last. "you say we go up to your room and if i make this lighter light ten times running i win a cadillac. if it misses just once then i forfeit the little finger of my left hand. is that right?""certainly. dat is de bet. but i tink you are afraid.""what do we do if i lose? do i have to hold my finger out while you chop it off?""oh, no! dat would be no good. and you might be tempted to refuse to hold it out. what i should do i should tie one of your hands to de table before we started and i should stand dere with a knife ready to go chop de momint your lighter missed.""what year is the cadillac?" the boy asked."excuse. i not understand.""what year-how old is the cadillac?""ah! how old? yes. it is last year. quite now car. but i see you are not betting man. americans never are."the boy paused for just a moment and he glanced first at the english girl, then at me. "yes," he said sharply. "i'll bet you.""good!" the little man clapped his hands together quietly, once. "fine," he said. "we do it now. and you, sir," he turned to me, "you would perhaps be good enough to, what you call it, to-to referee." he had pale, almost colorless eyes with tiny bright black pupils."well," i said. "i think it's a crazy bet. i don't think i like it very much.""nor do i," said the english girl. it was the first time she'd spoken. "i think it's a stupid, ridiculous bet.""are you serious about cutting off this boy's finger if he loses?" i said."certainly i am. also about cutting off this boy's finger if he loses?" i said."certainly i am. also about giving him cadillac if he win. come now. we go to my room."he stood up. "you like to put on some clothes first?" he said."no," the boy answered. "i'll come like this." then he turned to me. "i'd consider it a favor if you'd come along and referee.""all right," i said. "i'll come along, but i don't like the bet.""you come too," he said to the girl. "you come and watch.the little man led the way back through the garden to the hotel. he was animated now, and excited, and that seemed to make him bounce up higher than ever on his toes as he walked along."i live in annex," he said. "you like to see car first? iss just here."he took us to where we could see the front driveway of the hotel and he stopped and pointed to a sleek pale-green cadillac parked close by."dere she iss. de green one. you like?""say, that's a nice car," the boy said."all right. now we go up and see if you can win her."we followed him into the annex and up one flight of stairs. he unlocked his door and we all trooped into what was a large pleasant double bedroom. there was a woman's dressing gown lying across the bottom of one of the beds."first," he said, "we'ave a little martini."the drinks were on a small table in the far corner, all ready to be mixed, and there was a shaker and ice and plenty of glasses.  he began to make the martini, but meanwhile he'd rung the bell and now there was a knock on the door and a colored maid came in."ah!" he said, putting down the bottle of gin, taking a wallet from his pocket and pulling out a pound note. "you will do something for me now, pleess." he gave the maid the pound."you keep dat," he said. "and now we are going to play a little game in here and i want you to go off and find for me two-no three tings. i want some nails; i want a hammer, and i want a chopping knife, a butcher's chipping knife which you can borrow from de kitchen. you can get, yes?""a chopping knife!" the maid opened her eyes wide and clasped her hands in front of her. "you mean a real chopping knife?""yes, yes, of course. come on now, pleess. you can find dose tings surely for me.""yes, sir, i'll try, sir. surely i'll try to get them." and she went.the little man handed round the martinis. we stood there and sipped them, the boy with the long freckled face and the pointed nose, bare-bodied except for a pair of faded brown bathing shorts; the english girl, a large-boned, fair-haired girl wearing a pale blue bathing suit, who watched the boy over the top of her glass all the time; the little man with the colorless eyes standing there in his immaculate white suit drinking his martini and looking at the girl in her pale blue bathing dress. i didn't know what to make of it all. the man seemed serious about the bet and he seemed serious about the business of cutting off the finger. but hell, what if the boy lost? then we'd have to rush him to the hospital in the cadillac that he hadn't won. that would be a fine thing. now wouldn't that be a really find thing? it would be a damn silly unnecessary thing so far as i could see."don't you think this is rather a silly bet?" i said."i think it's a fine bet," the boy answered. he had already downed one large martini."i think it's a stupid, ridiculous bet," the girl said. "what'll happen if you lose?""it won't matter. come to think of it, i can't remember ever in my life having had any use for the little finger on my left hand. here he is." the boy took hold of the finger. "here he is and he hasn't ever done a thing for me yet. so why shouldn't i bet him. i think it's a fine bet."the little man smiled and picked up the shaker and refilled our glasses."before we begin," he said, "i will present to de-to de referee de key of de car." he produced a car key from his pocket and gave it to me. "de papers," he said, "de owning papers and insurance are in de pocket of de car."then the colored maid came in again. in one hand she carried a small chopper, the kind used by butchers for chopping meat bones, and in the other a hammer and a bag of nails."good! you get dem all. tank you, tank you. now you can go." he waited until the maid had closed the door, then he put the implements on one of the beds and said, "now we prepare ourselves, yes?" and to the boy "help me, pleess, with dis table. we carry it out a little."it was the usual kind of hotel writing desk, just a plain rectangular table about four feet by three with a blotting pad, ink, pens and paper. they carried it out into the room away from the wall, and removed the writing things."and now," he said, "a chair." he picked up a chair and placed it beside the table. he was very brisk and very animated, like a person organizing games at a children's party. "and now de nails. i must put in de nails." he fetched the nails and he began to hammer them into the top of the table.we stood there, the boy, the girl, and i, holding martinis in out hands, watching the little man at work. we watched him hammer two nails into the table, about six inches apart. he didn't hammer them right home; he allowed a small part of each one to stick up. then he tested them for firmness with his fingers.anyone would think the son of a bitch had done this before, i told myself. he never hesitates. table, nails, hammer, kitchen chopper. he knows exactly what he needs and how to arrange it."and now," he said, "all we want is some string." he found some string. "all right, at last we are ready. will you pleess to sit here at de table," he said to the boy.the boy put his glass away and sat down."now place de left hand between dese two nails. de nails are only so i can tie your hand in place. all right, good. now i tie your hand secure to de table-so,"he wound the string around the boy's wrist, then several times around the wide part of the hand, then he fastened it tight to the nails. he made a good job of it and when he'd finished there wasn't any question about the boy being able to draw his hand away.  but he could move his fingers."now pleess, clench de fist, all except for de little finger. you must leave de little finger sticking out, lying on de table.""ex-cellent! ex-cellent! now we are ready. wid your right hand you manipulate de lighter. but one momint, pleess."he skipped over to the bed and picked up the chopper. he came back and stood beside the table with the chopper in his hand."we are all ready?" he said. "mister referee, you must say to begin."the english girl was standing there in her pale blue bathing costume right behind the boy's chair. she was just standing there, not saying anything. the boy was sitting quite still, holding the lighter in his right hand, looking at the chopper. the little man was looking at me."are you ready?" i asked the boy."i'm ready.""and you?" to the little man."quite ready," he said and he lifted the chopper up in the air and held it there about two feet above the boy's finger, ready to chop. the boy watched it, but he didn't flinch and his mouth didn't move at all. he merely raised his eyebrows and frowned."all right," i said. "go ahead."the boy said, "will you please count aloud the number of times i light it.""yes," i said. "i'll do that."with his thumb he raised the top of the lighter, and again with the thumb he gave the wheel a sharp flick. the flint sparked and the wick caught fire and burned with a small yellow flame."one!" i called.he didn't blow the flame out; he closed the top of the lighter on it and he waited for perhaps five seconds before opening it again.he flicked the wheel very strongly and once more there was a small flame burning on the wick."two!"no one else said anything. the boy kept his eyes on the lighter. the little man held the chipper up in the air and he too was watching the lighter."three!""four!""five!""six!""seven!" obviously it was one of those lighters that worked. the fling gave a big spark and the wick was the right length. i watched the thumb snapping the top down onto the flame. then a pause. then the thumb raising the top once more. this was an all-thumb operation. the thumb did everything. i took a breath, ready to say eight. the thumb flicked the wheel. the flint sparked. the little flame appeared."eight!" i said, and as i said it the door opened. we all turned and we saw a woman standing in the doorway, a small, black-haired woman, rather old, who stood there for about two seconds then rushed forward shouting, "carlos! carlos!" she grabbed his wrist, took the chopper from him, threw it on the bed, took hold of the little man by the lapels of his white suit and began shaking him very vigorously, talking to him fast and loud and fiercely all the time in some spanish-sounding language. she shook him so fast you couldn't see him any more. he became a faint, misty, quickly moving outline, like the spokes of a turning wheel.then she slowed down and the little man came into view again and she hauled him across the room and pushed him backward onto one of the beds. he sat on the edge of it blinking his eyes and testing his head to see if it would still turn on his neck."i am so sorry," the woman said. "i am so terribly sorry that this should happen." she spoke almost perfect english."it is too bad," she went on. "i suppose it is really my fault. for ten minutes i leave him alone to go and have my hair washed and i come back and he is at it again." she looked sorry and deeply concerned.the boy was untying his hand from the table. the english girl and i stood there and said nothing."he is a menace," the woman said. "down where we live at home he has taken altogether forty-seven fingers from different people, and he has lost eleven cars. in the end they threatened to have him put away somewhere. that's why i brought him up here.""we were only having a little bet," mumbled the little man from the bed."i suppose he bet you a car," the woman said."yes," the boy answered. "a cadillac.""he has no car. it's mine. and that makes it worse," she said, "that he should bet you when he has nothing to bet with. i am ashamed and very sorry about it all." she seemed an awfully nice woman."well," i said, "then here's the key of your car." i put it on the table."we were only having a little bet," mumbled the little man."he hasn't anything left to bet with," the woman said. "he hasn't a thing in the world. not a thing. as a matter of fact i myself won it all from him a long while ago. it took time, a lot of time, and it was hard work, but i won it all in the end." she looked up at the boy and she smiled, a slow sad smile, and she came over and put out a hand to take the key from the table.i can see it now, that hand of hers; it had only one finger on it, and a thumb.for over forty years, in one part of the world or another, old man marshall had, served his country as a united states consul. he had been appointed by lincoln. for a quarter of a century that fact was his distinction. it was now his epitaph. but in former years, as each new administration succeeded the old, it had again and again saved his official head. when victorious and voracious place-hunters, searching the map of the world for spoils, dug out his hiding-place and demanded his consular sign as a reward for a younger and more aggressive party worker, the ghost of the dead president protected him. in the state department, marshall had become a tradition. "you can't touch him!" the state department would say; "why, he was appointed by lincoln!" secretly, for this weapon against the hungry headhunters, the department was infinitely grateful. old man marshall was a consul after its own heart. like a soldier, he was obedient, disciplined; wherever he was sent, there, without question, he would go. never against exile, against ill-health, against climate did he make complaint. nor when he was moved on and down to make way for some ne'er-do-well with influence, with a brother-in- law in the senate, with a cousin owning a newspaper, with rich relatives who desired him to drink himself to death at the expense of the government rather than at their own, did old man marshall point to his record as a claim for more just treatment.and it had been an excellent record. his official reports, in a quaint, stately hand, were models of english; full of information, intelligent, valuable, well observed. and those few of his countrymen, who stumbled upon him in the out-of-the-world places to which of late he had been banished, wrote of him to the department in terms of admiration and awe. never had he or his friends petitioned for promotion, until it was at last apparent that, save for his record and the memory of his dead patron, he had no friends. but, still in the department the tradition held and, though he was not advanced, he was not dismissed."if that old man's been feeding from the public trough ever since the civil war," protested a "practical" politician, "it seems to me, mr. secretary, that he's about had his share. ain't it time he give some one else a bite? some of us that has, done the work, that has borne the brunt--""this place he now holds," interrupted the secretary of state suavely, "is one hardly commensurate with services like yours. i can't pronounce the name of it, and i'm not sure just where it is, but i see that, of the last six consuls we sent there, three resigned within a month and the other three died of yellow-fever. still, if you. insist--"the practical politician reconsidered hastily. "i'm not the sort," he protested, "to turn out a man appointed by our martyred president. besides, he's so old now, if the fever don't catch him, he'll die of old age, anyway."the secretary coughed uncomfortably. "and they say," he murmured, "republics are ungrateful.""i don't quite get that," said the practical politician.of porto banos, of the republic of colombia, where as consul mr. marshall was upholding the dignity of the united states, little could be said except that it possessed a sure harbor. when driven from the caribbean sea by stress of weather, the largest of ocean tramps, and even battle-ships, could find in its protecting arms of coral a safe shelter. but, as young mr. aiken, the wireless operator, pointed out, unless driven by a hurricane and the fear of death, no one ever visited it. back of the ancient wharfs, that dated from the days when porto banos was a receiver of stolen goods for buccaneers and pirates, were rows of thatched huts, streets, according to the season, of dust or mud, a few iron-barred, jail-like barracks, customhouses, municipal buildings, and the whitewashed adobe houses of the consuls. the backyard of the town was a swamp. through this at five each morning a rusty engine pulled a train of flat cars to the base of the mountains, and, if meanwhile the rails had not disappeared into the swamp, at five in the evening brought back the flat cars laden with odorous coffeesacks.in the daily life of porto banos, waiting for the return of the train, and betting if it would return, was the chief interest. each night the consuls, the foreign residents, the wireless operator, the manager of the rusty railroad met for dinner. there at the head of the long table, by virtue of his years, of his courtesy and distinguished manner, of his office, mr. marshall presided. of the little band of exiles he was the chosen ruler. his rule was gentle. by force of example he had made existence in porto banos more possible. for women and children porto banos was a death-trap, and before "old man marshall" came there had been no influence to remind the enforced bachelors of other days.they had lost interest, had grown lax, irritable, morose. their white duck was seldom white. their cheeks were unshaven. when the sun sank into the swamp and the heat still turned porto banos into a turkish bath, they threw dice on the greasy tables of the cafã© bolivar for drinks. the petty gambling led to petty quarrels; the drinks to fever. the coming of mr. marshall changed that. his standard of life, his tact, his worldly wisdom, his cheerful courtesy, his fastidious personal neatness shamed the younger men; the desire to please him, to, stand well in his good opinion, brought back pride and self-esteem.the lieutenant of her majesty's gun-boat plover noted the change."used to be," he exclaimed, "you couldn't get out of the cafã© bolivar without some one sticking a knife in you; now it's a debating club. they all sit round a table and listen to an old gentleman talk world politics."if henry marshall brought content to the exiles of porto banos, there was little in return that porto banos could give to him. magazines and correspondents in six languages kept him in touch with those foreign lands in which he had represented his country, but of the country he had represented, newspapers and periodicals showed him only too clearly that in forty years it had grown away from him, had changed beyond recognition.when last he had called at the state department, he had been made to feel he was a man without a country, and when he visited his home town in vermont, he was looked upon as a rip van winkle. those of his boyhood friends who were not dead had long thought of him as dead. and the sleepy, pretty village had become a bustling commercial centre. in the lanes where, as a young man, he had walked among wheatfields, trolley-cars whirled between rows of mills and factories. the children had grown to manhood, with children of their own.like a ghost, he searched for house after house, where once he had been made welcome, only to find in its place a towering office building. "all had gone, the old familiar faces." in vain he scanned even the shop fronts for a friendly, homelike name. whether the fault was his, whether he would better have served his own interests than those of his government, it now was too late to determine. in his own home, he was a stranger among strangers. in the service he had so faithfully followed, rank by rank, he had been dropped, until now he, who twice had been a consul-general, was an exile, banished to a fever swamp. the great ship of state had dropped him overside, had "marooned" him, and sailed away.twice a day he walked along the shell road to the cafã© bolivar, and back again to the consulate. there, as he entered the outer office, josã© the colombian clerk, would rise and bow profoundly."any papers for me to sign, josã©? " the consul would ask."not to-day, excellency, "the clerk would reply. then josã© would return to writing a letter to his lady-love; not that there was any-thing to tell her, but because writing on the official paper of the consulate gave him importance in his eyes, and in hers. and in the inner office the consul would continue to gaze at the empty harbor, the empty coral reefs, the empty, burning sky.the little band of exiles were at second break fast when the wireless man came in late to announce that a red d. boat and the island of curacao had both reported a hurricane coming north. also, that much concern was felt for the safety of the yacht serapis. three days before, in advance of her coming, she had sent a wireless to wilhelmstad, asking the captain of the port to reserve a berth for her. she expected to arrive the following morning. but for forty-eight hours nothing had been heard from her, and it was believed she had been overhauled by the hurricane. owing to the presence on board of senator hanley, the closest friend of the new president, the man who had made him president, much concern was felt at washington. to try to pick her up by wireless, the gun-boat newark had been ordered from culebra, the cruiser raleigh, with admiral hardy on board, from colon. it was possible she would seek shelter at porto banos. the consul was ordered to report.as marshall wrote out his answer, the french consul exclaimed with interest:"he is of importance, then, this senator?" he asked. "is it that in your country ships of war are at the service of a senator?"aiken, the wireless operator, grinned derisively."at the service of this senator, they are!" he answered. "they call him the 'king-maker,' the man behind the throne.""but in your country," protested the frenchman, "there is no throne. i thought your president was elected by the people?""that's what the people think," answered aiken. "in god's country," he explained, "the trusts want a rich man in the senate, with the same interests as their own, to represent them. they chose hanley. he picked out of the candidates for the presidency the man he thought would help the interests. he nominated him, and the people voted for him. hanley is what we call a 'boss.'"the frenchman looked inquiringly at marshall."the position of the boss is the more dangerous," said marshall gravely, "because it is unofficial, because there are no laws to curtail his powers. men like senator hanley are a menace to good government. they see in public office only a reward for party workers.""that's right," assented aiken. "your forty years' service, mr. consul, wouldn't count with hanley. if he wanted your job, he'd throw you out as quick as he would a drunken cook."mr. marshall flushed painfully, and the french consul hastened to interrupt."then, let us pray," he exclaimed, with fervor, "that the hurricane has sunk the serapis, and all on board."two hours later, the serapis, showing she had met the hurricane and had come out second best, steamed into the harbor.her owner was young herbert livingstone, of washington. he once had been in the diplomatic service, and, as minister to the hague, wished to return to it. in order to bring this about he had subscribed liberally to the party campaign fund.with him, among other distinguished persons, was the all-powerful hanley. the kidnapping of hanley for the cruise, in itself, demonstrated the ability of livingstone as a diplomat. it was the opinion of many that it would surely lead to his appointment as a minister plenipotentiary. livingstone was of the same opinion. he had not lived long in the nation's capital without observing the value of propinquity. how many men he knew were now paymasters, and secretaries of legation, solely because those high in the government met them daily at the metropolitan club, and preferred them in almost any other place. and if, after three weeks as his guest on board what the newspapers called his floating palace, the senator could refuse him even the prize, legation of europe, there was no value in modest merit. as yet, livingstone had not hinted at his ambition. there was no need. to a statesman of hanley's astuteness, the largeness of livingstone's contribution to the campaign fund was self-explanatory.after her wrestling-match with the hurricane, all those on board the serapis seemed to find in land, even in the swamp land of porto banos, a compelling attraction. before the anchors hit the water, they were in the launch. on reaching shore, they made at once for the consulate. there were many cables they wished to start on their way by wireless; cables to friends, to newspapers, to the government.josã©, the colombian clerk, appalled by the unprecedented invasion of visitors, of visitors so distinguished, and marshall, grateful for a chance to serve his fellow-countrymen, and especially his countrywomen, were ubiquitous, eager, indispensable. at josã©'s desk the great senator, rolling his cigar between his teeth, was using, to josã©'s ecstasy, josã©'s own pen to write a reassuring message to the white house. at the consul's desk a beautiful creature, all in lace and pearls, was struggling to compress the very low opinion she held of a hurricane into ten words. on his knee, henry cairns, the banker, was inditing instructions to his wall street office, and upon himself livingstone had taken the responsibility of replying to the inquiries heaped upon marshall's desk, from many newspapers.it was just before sunset, and marshall produced his tea things, and the young person in pearls and lace, who was miss cairns, made tea for the women, and the men mixed gin and limes with tepid water. the consul apologized for proposing a toast in which they could not join. he begged to drink to those who had escaped the perils of the sea. had they been his oldest and nearest friends, his little speech could not have been more heart-felt and sincere. to his distress, it moved one of the ladies to tears, and in embarrassment he turned to the men."i regret there is no ice," he said, "but you know the rule of the tropics; as soon as a ship enters port, the ice- machine bursts.""i'll tell the steward to send you some, sir," said livingstone, "and as long as we're here."the senator showed his concern."as long as we're here?" he gasped."not over two days," answered the owner nervously. "the chief says it will take all of that to get her in shape. as you ought to know, senator, she was pretty badly mauled."the senator gazed blankly out of the window. beyond it lay the naked coral reefs, the empty sky, and the ragged palms of porto banos.livingstone felt that his legation was slipping from him."that wireless operator," he continued hastily, "tells me there is a most amusing place a few miles down the coast, las bocas, a sort of coney island, where the government people go for the summer. there's surf bathing and roulette and cafes chantants. he says there's some spanish dancers--"the guests of the serapis exclaimed with interest; the senator smiled. to marshall the general enthusiasm over the thought of a ride on a merry-go-round suggested that the friends of mr. livingstone had found their own society far from satisfying.greatly encouraged, livingstone continued, with enthusiasm:"and that wireless man said," he added, "that with the launch we can get there in half an hour. we might run down after dinner." he turned to marshall."will you join us, mr. consul?" he asked, "and dine with us, first?"marshall accepted with genuine pleasure. it had been many months since he had sat at table with his own people. but he shook his head doubtfully."i was wondering about las bocas," he explained, "if your going there might not get you in trouble at the next port. with a yacht, i think it is different, but las bocas is under quarantine."there was a chorus of exclamations."it's not serious," marshall explained. "there was bubonic plague there, or something like it. you would be in no danger from that. it is only that you might be held up by the regulations. passenger steamers can't land any one who has been there at any other port of the west indies. the english are especially strict. the royal mail won't even receive any one on board here without a certificate from the english consul saying he has not visited las bocas. for an american they would require the same guarantee from me. but i don't think the regulations extend to yachts. i will inquire. i don't wish to deprive you of any of the many pleasures of porto banos," he added, smiling, "but if you were refused a landing at your next port i would blame myself.""it's all right," declared livingstone decidedly. "it's just as you say; yachts and warships are exempt. besides, i carry my own doctor, and if he won't give us a clean bill of health, i'll make him walk the plank. at eight, then, at dinner. i'll send the cutter for you. i can't give you a salute, mr. consul, but you shall have all the side boys i can muster."those from the yacht parted from their consul in the most friendly spirit."i think he's charming!" exclaimed miss cairns. "and did you notice his novels? they were in every language. it must be terribly lonely down here, for a man like that.""he's the first of our consuls we've met on this trip," growled her father, "that we've caught sober.""sober!" exclaimed his wife indignantly."he's one of the marshalls of vermont. i asked him.""i wonder," mused hanley, "how much the place is worth? hamilton, one of the new senators, has been deviling the life out of me to send his son somewhere. says if he stays in washington he'll disgrace the family. i should think this place would drive any man to drink himself to death in three months, and young hamilton, from what i've seen of him, ought to be able to do it in a week. that would leave the place open for the next man.""there's a postmaster in my state thinks he carried it." the senator smiled grimly. "he has consumption, and wants us to give him a consulship in the tropics. i'll tell him i've seen porto banos, and that it's just the place for him."the senator's pleasantry was not well received. but miss cairns alone had the temerity to speak of what the others were thinking."what would become of mr. marshall?" she asked. the senator smiled tolerantly."i don't know that i was thinking of mr. marshall," he said. "i can't recall anything he has done for this administration. you see, miss cairns," he explained, in the tone of one addressing a small child, "marshall has been abroad now for forty years, at the expense of the taxpayers. some of us think men who have lived that long on their fellow-countrymen had better come home and get to work."livingstone nodded solemnly in assent. he did not wish a post abroad at the expense of the taxpayers. he was willing to pay for it. and then, with "ex-minister" on his visiting cards, and a sense of duty well performed, for the rest of his life he could join the other expatriates in paris.just before dinner, the cruiser raleigh having discovered the whereabouts of the serapis by wireless, entered the harbor, and admiral hardy came to the yacht to call upon the senator, in whose behalf he had been scouring the caribbean seas. having paid his respects to that personage, the admiral fell boisterously upon marshall.the two old gentlemen were friends of many years. they had met, officially and unofficially, in many strange parts of the world. to each the chance reunion was a piece of tremendous good fortune. and throughout dinner the guests of livingstone, already bored with each other, found in them and their talk of former days new and delightful entertainment. so much so that when, marshall having assured them that the local quarantine regulations did not extend to a yacht, the men departed for las bocas, the women insisted that he and admiral remain behind.it was for marshall a wondrous evening. to foregather with his old friend whom he had known since hardy was a mad midshipman, to sit at the feet of his own charming countrywomen, to listen to their soft, modulated laughter, to note how quickly they saw that to him the evening was a great event, and with what tact each contributed to make it the more memorable; all served to wipe out the months of bitter loneliness, the stigma of failure, the sense of undeserved neglect. in the moonlight, on the cool quarter-deck, they sat, in a half-circle, each of the two friends telling tales out of school, tales of which the other was the hero or the victim, "inside" stories of great occasions, ceremonies, bombardments, unrecorded "shirt-sleeve" diplomacy.hardy had helped to open the suez canal. marshall had assisted the queen of madagascar to escape from the french invaders. on the barbary coast hardy had chased pirates. in edinburgh marshall had played chess with carlyle. he had seen paris in mourning in the days of the siege, paris in terror in the days of the commune; he had known garibaldi, gambetta, the younger dumas, the creator of pickwick."do you remember that time in tangier," the admiral urged, when i was a midshipman, and got into the bashaw's harem?""do you remember how i got you out? marshall replied grimly."and," demanded hardy, "do you remember when adelina patti paid a visit to the kearsarge at marseilles in '65--george dewey was our second officer--and you were bowing and backing away from her, and you backed into an open hatch, and she said 'my french isn't up to it' what was it she said?""i didn't hear it," said marshall; "i was too far down the hatch.""do you mean the old kearsarge?" asked mrs. cairns. "were you in the service then, mr. marshall? "with loyal pride in his friend, the admiral answered for him:"he was our consul-general at marseilles!"there was an uncomfortable moment. even those denied imagination could not escape the contrast, could see in their mind's eye the great harbor of marseilles, crowded with the shipping of the world, surrounding it the beautiful city, the rival of paris to the north, and on the battleship the young consul-general making his bow to the young empress of song. and now, before their actual eyes, they saw the village of porto banos, a black streak in the night, a row of mud shacks, at the end of the wharf a single lantern yellow in the clear moonlight.later in the evening miss cairns led the admiral to one side."admiral," she began eagerly, "tell me about your friend. why is he here? why don't they give him a place worthy of him? i've seen many of our representatives abroad, and i know we cannot afford to waste men like that." the girl exclaimed indignantly: " he's one of the most interesting men i've ever met! he's lived everywhere, known every one. he's a distinguished man, a cultivated man; even i can see he knows his work, that he's a diplomat, born, trained, that he's--" the admiral interrupted with a growl."you don't have to tell me about henry," he protested. "i've known henry twenty-five years. if henry got his deserts," he exclaimed hotly, "he wouldn't be a consul on this coral reef; he'd be a minister in europe. look at me! we're the same age. we started together. when lincoln sent him to morocco as consul, he signed my commission as a midshipman. now i'm an admiral. henry has twice my brains and he's been a consul-general, and he's here, back at the foot of the ladder!""why?" demanded the girl."because the navy is a service and the consular service isn't a service. men like senator hanley use it to pay their debts. while henry's been serving his country abroad, he's lost his friends, lost his 'pull.' those politicians up at washington have no use for him. they don't consider that a consul like henry can make a million dollars for his countrymen. he can keep them from shipping goods where there's no market, show them where there is a market." the admiral snorted contemptuously. "you don't have to tell me the value of a good consul. but those politicians don't consider that. they only see that he has a job worth a few hundred dollars, and they want it, and if he hasn't other politicians to protect him, they'll take it." the girl raised her head."why don't you speak to the senator?" she asked. "tell him you've known him for years, that--""glad to do it!" exclaimed the admiral heartily. "it won't be the first time. but henry mustn't know. he's too confoundedly touchy. he hates the idea of influence, hates men like hanley, who abuse it. if he thought anything was given to him except on his merits, he wouldn't take it.""then we won't tell him, " said the girl. for a moment she hesitated."if i spoke to mr. hanley," she asked, "told him what i learned to-night of mr. marshall, "would it have any effect?""don't know how it will affect hanley, said the sailor, "but if you asked me to make anybody a consul-general, i'd make him an ambassador."later in the evening hanley and livingstone were seated alone on deck. the visit to las bocas had not proved amusing, but, much to livingstone's relief, his honored guest was now in good-humor. he took his cigar from his lips, only to sip at a long cool drink. he was in a mood flatteringly confidential and communicative."people have the strangest idea of what i can do for them," he laughed. it was his pose to pretend he was without authority. "they believe i've only to wave a wand, and get them anything they want. i thought i'd be safe from them on board a yacht."livingstone, in ignorance of what was coming, squirmed apprehensively."but it seems," the senator went on, " i'm at the mercy of a conspiracy. the women folk want me to do something for this fellow marshall. if they had their way, they'd send him to the court of st. james. and old hardy, too, tackled me about him. so did miss cairns.and then marshall himself got me behind the wheel-house, and i thought he was going to tell me how good he was, too! but he didn't."as though the joke were on himself, the senator laughed appreciatively."told me, instead, that hardy ought to be a vice-admiral."livingstone, also, laughed, with the satisfied air of one who cannot be tricked."they fixed it up between them," he explained, "each was to put in a good word for the other." he nodded eagerly. "that's what i think."there were moments during the cruise when senator hanley would have found relief in dropping his host overboard. with mock deference, the older man inclined his head."that's what you think, is it?" he asked. "livingstone," he added, "you certainly are a great judge of men!"the next morning, old man marshall woke with a lightness at his heart that had been long absent. for a moment, conscious only that he was happy, he lay between sleep and waking, frowning up at his canopy of mosquito net, trying to realize what change had come to him. then he remembered. his old friend had returned. new friends had come into his life and welcomed him kindly. he was no longer lonely. as eager as a boy, he ran to the window. he had not been dreaming. in the harbor lay the pretty yacht, the stately, white-hulled war- ship. the flag that drooped from the stern of each caused his throat to tighten, brought warm tears to his eyes, fresh resolve to his discouraged, troubled spirit. when he knelt beside his bed, his heart poured out his thanks in gratitude and gladness.while he was dressing, a blue-jacket brought a note from the admiral. it invited him to tea on board the war-ship, with the guests of the serapis. his old friend added that he was coming to lunch with his consul, and wanted time reserved for a long talk. the consul agreed gladly. he was in holiday humor. the day promised to repeat the good moments of the night previous.at nine o'clock, through the open door of the consulate, marshall saw aiken, the wireless operator, signaling from the wharf excitedly to the yacht, and a boat leave the ship and return. almost immediately the launch, carrying several passengers, again made the trip shoreward.half an hour later, senator hanley, miss cairns, and livingstone came up the waterfront, and entering the consulate, seated themselves around marshall's desk. livingstone was sunk in melancholy. the senator, on the contrary, was smiling broadly. his manner was one of distinct relief. he greeted the consul with hearty good-humor."i'm ordered home!" he announced gleefully. then, remembering the presence of livingstone, he hastened to add: "i needn't say how sorry i am to give up my yachting trip, but orders are orders. the president," he explained to marshall, " cables me this morning to come back and take my coat off." the prospect, as a change from playing bridge on a pleasure boat, seemed far from depressing him."those filibusters in the senate," he continued genially, "are making trouble again. they think they've got me out of the way for another month, but they'll find they're wrong. when that bill comes up, they'll find me at the old stand and ready for business!" marshall did not attempt to conceal his personal disappointment."i am so sorry you are leaving," he said; "selfishly sorry, i mean. i'd hoped you all would be here for several days." he looked inquiringly toward livingstone."i understood the serapis was disabled," he explained."she is," answered hanley. "so's the raleigh. at a pinch, the admiral might have stretched the regulations and carried me to jamaica, but the raleigh's engines are knocked about too. i've got to reach kingston thursday. the german boat leaves there thursday for new york. at first it looked as though i couldn't do it, but we find that the royal mail is due to-day, and she can get to kingston wednesday night. it's a great piece of luck. i wouldn't bother you with my troubles, "the senator explained pleasantly, "but the agent of the royal mail here won't sell me a ticket until you've put your seal to this." he extended a piece of printed paper.as hanley had been talking, the face of the consul had grown grave. he accepted the paper, but did not look at it. instead, he regarded the senator with troubled eyes. when he spoke, his tone was one of genuine concern."it is most unfortunate," he said. "but i am afraid the royal mail will not take you on board. because of las bocas," he explained. "if we had only known!" he added remorsefully. "it is most unfortunate.""because of las bocas?" echoed hanley."you don't mean they'll refuse to take me to jamaica because i spent half an hour at the end of a wharf listening to a squeaky gramophone?""the trouble," explained marshall, "is this: if they carried you, all the other passengers would be held in quarantine for ten days, and there are fines to pay, and there would be difficulties over the mails. but," he added hopefully, "maybe the regulations have been altered. i will see her captain, and tell him--""see her captain!" objected hanley. "why see the captain? he doesn't know i've been to that place. why tell him? all i need is a clean bill of health from you. that's all he wants. you have only to sign that paper." marshall regarded the senator with surprise."but i can't," he said."you can't? why not?""because it certifies to the fact that you have not visited las bocas. unfortunately, you have visited las bocas."the senator had been walking up and down the room. now he seated himself, and stared at marshall curiously."it's like this, mr. marshall," he began quietly. "the president desires my presence in washington, thinks i can be of some use to him there in helping carry out certain party measures--measures to which he pledged himself before his election. down here, a british steamship line has laid down local rules which, in my case anyway, are ridiculous. the question is, are you going to be bound by the red tape of a ha'penny british colony, or by your oath to the president of the united states?"the sophistry amused marshall. he smiled good-naturedly and shook his head."i'm afraid, senator," he said, "that way of putting it is hardly fair. unfortunately, the question is one of fact. i will explain to the captain--""you will explain nothing to the captain!" interrupted hanley. "this is a matter which concerns no one but our two selves. i am not asking favors of steamboat captains. i am asking an american consul to assist an american citizen in trouble, and, "he added, with heavy sarcasm, "incidentally, to carry out the wishes of his president."marshall regarded the senator with an expression of both surprise and disbelief."are you asking me to put my name to what is not so?" he said. "are you serious?""that paper, mr. marshall," returned hanley steadily, "is a mere form, a piece of red tape. there's no more danger of my carrying the plague to jamaica than of my carrying a dynamite bomb. you know that.""i do know that," assented marshall heartily."i appreciate your position, and i regret it exceedingly. you are the innocent victim of a regulation which is a wise regulation, but which is most unfair to you. my own position," he added, "is not important, but you can believe me, it is not easy. it is certainly no pleasure for me to be unable to help you."hanley was leaning forward, his hands on his knees, his eyes watching marshall closely. "then you refuse?" he said. "why?"marshall regarded the senator steadily. his manner was untroubled. the look he turned upon hanley was one of grave disapproval."you know why," he answered quietly. "it is impossible."in sudden anger hanley rose. marshall, who had been seated behind his desk, also rose. for a moment, in silence, the two men confronted each other. then hanley spoke; his tone was harsh and threatening."then i am to understand," he exclaimed, "that you refuse to carry out the wishes of a united states senator and of the president of the united states?"in front of marshall, on his desk, was the little iron stamp of the consulate. protectingly, almost caressingly, he laid his hand upon it."i refuse," he corrected, "to place the seal of this consulate on a lie."there was a moment's pause. miss cairns, unwilling to remain, and unable to withdraw, clasped her hands unhappily and stared at the floor. livingstone exclaimed in indignant protest. hanley moved a step nearer and, to emphasize what he said, tapped his knuckles on the desk. with the air of one confident of his advantage, he spoke slowly and softly."do you appreciate," he asked, "that, while you may be of some importance down here in this fever swamp, in washington i am supposed to carry some weight? do you appreciate that i am a senator from a state that numbers four millions of people, and that you are preventing me from serving those people?" marshall inclined his head gravely and politely. "and i want you to appreciate," he said, "that while i have no weight at washington, in this fever swamp i have the honor to represent eighty millions of people, and as long as that consular sign is over my door i don't intend to prostitute it for you, or the president of the united states, or any one of those eighty millions."of the two men, the first to lower his eyes was hanley. he laughed shortly, and walked to the door. there he turned, and indifferently, as though the incident no longer interested him, drew out his watch."mr. marshall," he said, "if the cable is working, i'll take your tin sign away from you by sunset."for one of marshall's traditions, to such a speech there was no answer save silence. he bowed, and, apparently serene and undismayed, resumed his seat. from the contest, judging from the manner of each, it was marshall, not hanley, who had emerged victorious.but miss cairns was not deceived. under the unexpected blow, marshall had turned older. his clear blue eyes had grown less alert, his broad shoulders seemed to stoop. in sympathy, her own eyes filled with sudden tears."what will you do?" she whispered."i don't know what i shall do," said marshall simply. "i should have liked to have resigned. it's a prettier finish. after forty years--to be dismissed by cable is--it's a poor way of ending it."miss cairns rose and walked to the door. there she turned and looked back."i am sorry," she said. and both understood that in saying no more than that she had best shown her sympathy.an hour later the sympathy of admiral hardy was expressed more directly."if he comes on board my ship," roared that gentleman, "i'll push him down an ammunition hoist and break his damned neck!"marshall laughed delightedly. the loyalty of his old friend was never so welcome."you'll treat him with every courtesy," he said. "the only satisfaction he gets out of this is to see that he has hurt me. we will not give him that satisfaction."but marshall found that to conceal his wound was more difficult than he had anticipated. when, at tea time, on the deck of the war-ship, he again met senator hanley and the guests of the serapis, he could not forget that his career had come to an end. there was much to remind him that this was so. he was made aware of it by the sad, sympathetic glances of the women; by their tactful courtesies; by the fact that livingstone, anxious to propitiate hanley, treated him rudely; by the sight of the young officers, each just starting upon a career of honor, and possible glory, as his career ended in humiliation; and by the big war-ship herself, that recalled certain crises when he had only to press a button and war-ships had come at his bidding.at five o'clock there was an awkward moment. the royal mail boat, having taken on her cargo, passed out of the harbor on her way to jamaica, and dipped her colors. senator hanley, abandoned to his fate, observed her departure in silence.livingstone, hovering at his side, asked sympathetically: "have they answered your cable, sir?" "they have," said hanley gruffly."was it--was it satisfactory?" pursued the diplomat. "it was," said the senator, with emphasis.far from discouraged, livingstone continued his inquiries."and when," he asked eagerly, "are you going to tell him?""now!" said the senator.the guests were leaving the ship. when all were seated in the admiral's steam launch, the admiral descended the accommodation ladder and himself picked up the tiller ropes."mr. marshall," he called, "when i bring the launch broadside to the ship and stop her, you will stand ready to receive the consul's salute."involuntarily, marshall uttered an exclamation of protest. he had forgotten that on leaving the war-ship, as consul, he was entitled to seven guns. had he remembered, he would have insisted that the ceremony be omitted. he knew that the admiral wished to show his loyalty, knew that his old friend was now paying him this honor only as a rebuke to hanley. but the ceremony was no longer an honor. hanley had made of it a mockery. it served only to emphasize what had been taken from him. but, without a scene, it now was too late to avoid it. the first of the seven guns had roared from the bow, and, as often he had stood before, as never he would so stand again, marshall took his place at the gangway of the launch. his eyes were fixed on the flag, his gray head was uncovered, his hat was pressed above his heart.for the first time since hanley had left the consulate, he fell into sudden terror lest he might give way to his emotions. indignant at the thought, he held himself erect. his face was set like a mask, his eyes were untroubled. he was determined they should not see that he was suffering.another gun spat out a burst of white smoke, a stab of flame. there was an echoing roar. another and another followed. marshall counted seven, and then, with a bow to the admiral, backed from the gangway.and then another gun shattered the hot, heavy silence. marshall, confused, embarrassed, assuming he had counted wrong, hastily returned to his place. but again before he could leave it, in savage haste a ninth gun roared out its greeting. he could not still be mistaken. he turned appealingly to his friend. the eyes of the admiral were fixed upon the war-ship. again a gun shattered the silence. was it a jest? were they laughing at him? marshall flushed miserably. he gave a swift glance toward the others. they were smiling. then it was a jest. behind his back, something of which they all were cognizant was going forward. the face of livingstone alone betrayed a like bewilderment to his own. but the others, who knew, were mocking him.for the thirteenth time a gun shook the brooding swamp land of porto banos. and then, and not until then, did the flag crawl slowly from the mast-head. mary cairns broke the tenseness by bursting into tears. but marshall saw that every one else, save she and livingstone, were still smiling. even the bluejackets in charge of the launch were grinning at him. he was beset by smiling faces. and then from the war-ship, unchecked, came, against all regulations, three long, splendid cheers.marshall felt his lips quivering, the warm tears forcing their way to his eyes. he turned beseechingly to his friend. his voice trembled."charles," he begged, "are they laughing at me?"eagerly, before the other would answer, senator hanley tossed his cigar into the water and, scrambling forward, seized marshall by the hand."mr. marshall," he cried, "our president has great faith in abraham lincoln's judgment of men. and this salute means that this morning he appointed you our new minister to the hague. i'm one of those politicians who keeps his word. i told you i'd take your tin sign away from you by sunset. i've done it!"_in memory of c.d.k._on christmas eve around 1942,  when i was a boy, after having the traditional punch and cookies and after having sung 'round the fire (my aunty mary at the piano), i, with my sister, my mother and my aunts, and emma jackman and her son, got into emma jackman's car and drove down taylor avenue to church for the midnight service: i looked out the rear window at passing houses, doors adorned with holly wreaths, i looked into windows--catching glimpses of tinseled trees and men and women and children moving through rooms into my mind and memory forever; the car slowed to the corner stop at jefferson and the action seemed like a greater action, of christmas in a cold damp missouri night; patches of snow lay on the ground and in the car the dark figures of my mother and sister and aunts talked around me and the car began to move along in an air of sky--at bottom dark and cold, seeming to transform the car, my face, and hands, pressed close to the glass as i saw my friends with their parents in their cars take the left turn onto argonne drive and look for a parking place near the church; emma jackman followed, and i watched heavily coated figures make their exists, and move down the winter walk toward the jewel-like glittering church--up the steps into the full light of the doorway--fathers and sons and mothers and daughters i knew and understood them all, i gazed at them with blazing eyes: light poured from open doors; high arched stained glass windows cast downward slanting shafts of color across the cold churchyard, and the organ boomed inside while we parked and got out and walked along the sidewalk, i holding my mother's right arm, my sister held mother's left arm (mother letting us a little support her)--down the sidewalk to join others at the warmly good noisy familiar threshold: spirits swirled up the steps into the church and billy berthold handed out the christmas leaflets, i gripped mine. i looked at the dominant blue illustration of birth in white and yellow rays moving outward to form a circle around the christ child's skull as mary downward gazed; joseph; kneeling wisemen downward gazed; i gazed down the long center aisle at the rising altar's dazzling cross and we moved down the aisle, slipped in front of mr. and mrs. sloan and my buddy lorry, mr. and mrs. dart and my buddy charles, mr. and mrs. reid and my buddy gene and his brother ed--we then knelt away the conscious realization of our selves among music in the house of the lord, i conscious of a voice that, slowly, coarsely, wandered--the i (eye) in see, hear me (i), we were on our feet singing, and the choir swept down the aisle, their familiar faces moving side to side as collective voices raised in anthem i held the hymnbook open and my mother and sister and i sang in celebration of god the crowded and brightly decorated--pine boughs and holly wreaths hung around the walls with candles high on each pew, i glanced at the gleaming cross--my spine arched, and far beyond the church, beyond the front door, beyond the land of the last sentence in james joyce's _dubliners_ a distant door seemed to open away beyond pungent green of pine gathered around rich red hollyberry clusters, red velvet, white-yellow center of candle flame, white of silk, gold of tassle, and gleaming glittering eternally cubistic gold cross and darkness of wooden beams powerfully sweeping upward--apex for the strange smoky penuma that so exhilarated me, i who smiled and reeled in a vast cold cold gaze down at myself listening to charles kean's christian existentialist sermon in time before the plate was passed and the choir had singing, gone, and we were outside, i standing by my sister; my mother and aunts were shaking charles's hand, i shook that solid hand warmly, and i walked down the steps, my mother and sister and aunts again, again, once again it rushed through me taking my breath, my spine arched toward trees and streets walking slowly breathing deep i moved down the sidewalk, eyes crystallizing streets yards houses and all lives within; my perception forked upward through treetops into the vertical fields of space, and a moment later, in the crowded back seat of the car, as emma jackman started the engine, i breathed vapor on the rear window, and with my finger, i signed my name.the baron von koëldwethout, of grogzwig in germany, was as likely a young baron as you would wish to see.  i needn't say that he lived in a castle, because that's of course; neither need i say that he lived in an old castle; for what german baron ever lived in a new one?  there were many strange circumstances connected with this venerable building, among which, not the least startling and mysterious were, that when the wind blew, it rumbled in the chimneys, or even howled among the trees in the neighboring forest; and that when the moon shone, she found her way through certain small loopholes in the wall, and actually made some parts of the wide halls and galleries quite light, while she left others in gloomy shadow.  i believe that one of the baron's ancestors, being short of money, had inserted a dagger in a gentleman who called one night to ask his way, and it was supposed that these miraculous occurrences took place in consequence.  and yet i hardly know how that could have been, either, because the baron's ancestor, who was an amiable man, felt very sorry afterwards for having been so rash, and laying violent hands upon a quantity of stone and timber which belonged to a weaker baron, built a chapel as an apology, and so took a receipt from heaven, in full of all demands.talking of the baron's ancestor puts me in mind of the baron's great claims to respect, on the score of his pedigree.  i am afraid to say, i am sure, how many ancestors the baron had; but i know that he had a great many more than any other man of his time; and i only wish that he had lived in these latter days, that he might have had more.  it is a very hard thing upon the great men of past centuries, that they should have come into the world so soon, because a man who was born three or four hundred years ago, cannot reasonably be expected to have had as many relations before him, as a man who is born now. the last man, whoever he is - and he may be a cobbler or some low vulgar dog for aught we know - will have a longer pedigree than the greatest nobleman now alive; and i contend that this is not fair.well, but the baron von koëldwethout of grogzwig!  he was a fine swarthy fellow, with dark hair and large moustachios, who rode a-hunting in clothes of lincoln green, with russet boots on his feet, and a bugle slung over his shoulder, like the guard of a long stage.  when he blew this bugle, four-and-twenty other gentlemen of inferior rank, in lincoln green a little coarser, and russet boots with a little thicker soles, turned out directly; and away galloped the whole train, with spears in their hands like lackered area railings, to hunt down the boars, or perhaps encounter a bear:  in which latter case the baron killed him first, and greased his whiskers with him afterwards.this was a merry life for the baron of grogzwig, and a merrier still for the baron's retainers, who drank rhine wine every night till they fell under the table, and then had the bottles on the floor, and called for pipes. never were such jolly, roystering, rollicking, merry-making blades, as the jovial crew of grogzwig.but the pleasures of the table, or the pleasures of under the table, require a little variety; especially when the same five-and-twenty people sit daily down to the same board, to discuss the same subjects, and tell the same stories.  the baron grew weary, and wanted excitement.  he took to quarrelling with his gentlemen, and tried kicking two or three of them every day after dinner.  this was a pleasant change at first; but it became monotonous after a week or so, and the baron felt quite out of sorts, and cast about, in despair, for some new amusement.one night, after a day's sport in which he had outdone nimrod or gillingwater, and slaughtered "another fine bear", and brought him home in triumph, the baron von koëldwethout sat moodily at the head of his table, eyeing the smoky roof of the hall with a discontented aspect.  he swallowed huge bumpers of wine, but the more he swallowed, the more he frowned.  the gentlemen who had been honoured with the dangerous distinction of sitting on his right and left, imitated him to a miracle in the drinking, and frowned at each other."i will!" cried the baron suddenly, smiting the table with his right hand, and twirling his moustache with his left.  "fill to the lady of grogzwig!"the four-and-twenty lincoln greens turned pale, with the exception of their four-and-twenty noses, which were unchangeable."i said to the lady of grogzwig," repeated the baron, looking round the board."to the lady of grogzwig!" shouted the lincoln greens; and down their four-and-twenty throats went four-and-twenty imperial pints of such rare old hock, that they smacked their eight-and-forty lips, and winked again."the fair daughter of the baron von swillenhausen," said koëldwethout, condescending to explain.  "we will demand her in marriage of her father, ere the sun goes down tomorrow.  if he refuse our suit, we will cut off his nose."a hoarse murmur arose from the company; every man touched, first the hilt of his sword, and then the tip of his nose, with appalling significance.what a pleasant thing filial piety is, to contemplate!  if the daughter of the baron von swillenhausen had pleaded a preoccupied heart, or fallen at her father's feet and corned them in salt tears, or only fainted away, and complimented the old gentleman in frantic ejaculations, the odds are a hundred to one, but swillenhausen castle would have been turned out at window, or rather the baron turned out at window, and the castle demolished.  the damsel held her peace, however, when an early messenger bore the request of von koëldwethout next morning, and modestly retired to her chamber, from the casement of which she watched the coming of the suitor and his retinue.  she was no sooner assured that the horseman with the large moustachios was her proferred husband, than she hastened to her father's presence, and expressed her readiness to sacrifice herself to secure his peace.  the venerable baron caught his child into his arms, and shed a wink of joy.there was a great feasting at the castle, that day.  the four-and-twenty lincoln greens of von koëldwethout exchanged vows of eternal friendship with twelve lincoln greens of von swillenhausen, and promised the old baron that they would drink his wine "till all was blue" - meaning probably until their whole countenances had acquired the same tint as their noses. everybody slapped everybody else's back, when the time for parting came; and the baron von koëldwethout and his followers rode gaily home.for six mortal weeks, the bears and boars had a holiday.  the houses of koëldwethout and swillenhausen were united; the spears rusted; and the baron's bugle grew hoarse for lack of blowing.those were great times for the four-and-twenty; but, alas!  their high and palmy days had taken boots to themselves, and were already walking off."my dear," said the baroness."my love," said the baron."those coarse, noisy men--""which, ma'am?" said the baron starting.the baroness pointed, from the window at which they stood, to the courtyard beneath, where the unconscious lincoln greens were taking a copious stirrup-cup, preparatory to issuing forth, after a boar or two."my hunting train, ma'am," said the baron."disband them, love," murmured the baroness."disband them!" cried the baron, in amazement."to please me, love," replied the baroness."to please the devil, ma'am," answered the baron.whereupon the baroness uttered a great cry, and swooned away at the baron's feet.what could the baron do?  he called for the lady's maid, and roared for the doctor; and then, rushing into the yard, kicked the two lincoln greens who were the most used to it, and cursing the others all round, bade them go - but never mind where, i don't know the german for it, or i would put it delicately that way.it is not for me to say by what means or by what degrees, some wives manage to keep down some husbands as they do, although i may have my private opinion on the subject, and may think that no member of parliament ought to be married, inasmuch as three married members out of every four, must vote according to their wives' consciences if there be such things, and not according to their own.  all i need say, just now, is, that the baroness von koëldwethout somehow or other acquired great control over the baron von koëldwethout, and that, little by little, and bit by bit, and day by day, and year by year, the baron got the worst of some disputed question, or was slily unhorsed from some old hobby; and that by the time he was a fat hearty fellow of forty-eight or thereabouts, he had no feasting, no revelry, no hunting train, and no hunting - nothing in short that he liked, or used to have; and that, although he was as fierce as a lion and as bold as brass, he was decidedly snubbed and put down, by his own lady, in his own castle of grogzwig.nor was this the whole extent of the baron's misfortunes.  about a year after his nuptials, there came into the world a lusty young baron, in whose honour a great many fireworks were let off, and a great many dozens of wine drunk; but next year there came a young baroness, and next year another young baron, and so on, every year, either a baron or baroness and one year both together, until the baron found himself the father of a small family of twelve.  upon every one of these anniversaries, the venerable baroness von swillenhausen was nervously sensitive for the well-being of her child the baroness von koëldwethout and although it was not found that the good lady ever did anything material towards contributing to her child's recovery, still she made it a point of duty to be as nervous as possible at the castle at grogzwig, and to divide her time between moral observations on the baron's housekeeping, and bewailing the hard lot of her unhappy daughter.  and if the baron of grogzwig, a little hurt and irritated at this, took heart, and ventured to suggest that his wife was at least no worse off than the wives of other barons, the baroness von swillenhausen begged all persons to take notice, that nobody but she, sympathized with her dear daughter's sufferings; upon which, her relations and friends remarked, that to be sure she did cry a great deal more than her son-in-law, and that if there were a hard-hearted brute alive, it was that baron of grogzwig.the poor baron bore it all, as long as he could, and when he could bear it no longer lost his appetite and his spirits, and sat himself gloomily and dejectedly down.  but there were worse troubles yet in store for him, and as they came on, his melancholy and sadness increased. times changed. he got into debt. the grogzwig coffers ran low, though the swillenhausen family had looked upon them as inexhaustible; and just when the baroness was on the point of making a thirteenth addition to the family pedigree, von koëldwethout discovered that he had no means of replenishing them."i don't see what is to be done," said the baron. "i think i'll kill myself."this was a bright idea.  the baron took an old hunting-knife from a cupboard hard by, and having sharpened it on his boot, made what boys call "an offer" at his throat."hem!" said the baron, stopping short.  "perhaps it's not sharp enough."the baron sharpened it again, and made another offer, when his hand was arrested by a loud screaming among the young barons and baronesses, who had a nursery in an upstairs tower with iron bars outside the window, to prevent their tumbling out into the moat."if i had been a bachelor," said the baron sighing, "i might have done it fifty times over, without being interrupted.  hallo!  put a flask of wine and the largest pipe, in the little vaulted room behind the hall."one of the domestics, in a very kind manner, executed the baron's order in the course of half an hour or so, and von koëldwethout being apprised thereof, strode to the vaulted room, the walls of which, being of dark shining wood, gleamed in the light of the blazing logs which were piled upon the hearth.  the bottle and pipe were ready, and, upon the whole, the place looked very comfortable."leave the lamp," said the baron."anything else, my lord?" inquired the domestic."the room," replied the baron.  the domestic obeyed, and the baron locked the door."i'll smoke a last pipe," said the baron, "and then i'll be off."  so, putting the knife upon the table till he wanted it, and tossing off a goodly measure of wine, the lord of grogzwig threw himself back in his chair, stretched his legs out before the fire, and puffed away.he thought about a great many things - about his present troubles and past days of bachelorship, and about the lincoln greens, long since disappeared up and down the country, no one knew whither:  with the exception of two who had been unfortunately beheaded, and four who had killed themselves with drinking.  his mind was running upon bears and boars, when, in the process of draining his glass to the bottom, he raised his eyes, and saw, for the first time and with unbounded astonishment, that he was not alone.no, he was not; for, on the opposite side of the fire, there sat with folded arms a wrinkled hideous figure, with deeply sunk and bloodshot eyes, and an immensely long, cadaverous face, shadowed by jagged and matted locks of coarse black hair.  he wore a kind of tunic of a dull bluish colour, which, the baron observed, on regarding it attentively, was clasped or ornamented down the front, with coffin handles.  his legs too, were encased in coffin plates as though in armour; and over his left shoulder he wore a short dusky cloak, which seemed made of remnant of some pall.  he took no notice of the baron, but was intently eyeing the fire."halloa!" said the baron, stamping his foot to attract attention."halloa!" replied the stranger, moving his eyes towards the baron, but not his face or himself.  "what now?""what now?" replied the baron, nothing daunted by his hollow voice and lustreless eyes, "i should ask that question.  how did you get here?""through the door," replied the figure."what are you?" says the baron."a man," replied the figure."i don't believe it," says the baron."disbelieve it then," says the figure."i will," rejoined the baron.the figure looked at the bold baron of grogzwig for some time, and then said familiarly,"there's no coming over you, i see.  i'm not a man!""what are you then?" asked the baron."a genius," replied the figure."you don't look much like one," returned the baron scornfully."i am the genius of despair and suicide," said the apparition.  "now you know me."with these words the apparition turned towards the baron, as if composing himself for a talk - and, what was very remarkable, was, that he threw his cloak aside, and displaying a stake, which was run through the centre of his body, pulled it out with a jerk, and laid it on the table, as composedly as if it had been a walking-stick."now," said the figure, glancing at the hunting-knife, "are you ready for me?""not quite," rejoined the baron; "i must finish this pipe first.""look sharp then," said the figure.you seem in a hurry," said the baron."why, yes, i am," answered the figure; "they're doing a pretty brisk business in my way, over in england and france just now, and my time is a good deal taken up.""do you drink?" said the baron, touching the bottle with the bowl of his pipe."nine times out of ten, and then very hard," rejoined the figure, drily."never in moderation?" asked the baron."never," replied the figure, with a shudder, "that breeds cheerfulness."the baron took another look at his new friend, whom he thought an uncommonly queer customer, and at length inquired whether he took any active part in such little proceedings as that which he had in contemplation."no," replied the figure evasively; "but i am always present.""just to see fair, i suppose?" said the baron."just that," replied the figure playing with the stake, and examining the ferule."be as quick as you can, will you, for there's a young gentleman who is afflicted with too much money and leisure wanting me now, i find.""going to kill himself because he has too much money!" exclaimed the baron, quite tickled:  "ha! ha! that's a good one."  this was the first time the baron had laughed for many a long day."i say," expostulated the figure, looking very much scared; "don't do that again.""why not?" demanded the baron."because it gives me pain all over," replied the figure.  "sigh as much as you please; that does me good."the baron sighed mechanically, at the mention of the word; the figure, brightening up again, handed him the hunting-knife with the most winning politeness."it's not a bad idea though," said the baron, feeling the edge of the weapon; "a man killing himself because he has too much money.""pooh!" said the apparition, petulantly, "no better than a man's killing himself because he has none or little."whether the genius unintentionally committed himself in saying this, or whether he thought the baron's mind was so thoroughly made up that it didn't matter what he said, i have no means of knowing.  i only know that the baron stopped his hand, all of a sudden, opened his eyes wide, and looked as if quite a new light had come upon him for the first time."why, certainly," said von koëldwethout, "nothing is too bad to be retrieved.""except empty coffers," cried the genius."well, but they may be one day filled again," said the baron."scolding wives," snarled the genius."oh!  they may be made quiet," said the baron."thirteen children," shouted the genius."can't all go wrong, surely," said the baron.the genius was evidently growing very savage with the baron, for holding these opinions all at once; but he tried to laugh it off, and said if he would let him know when he had left off joking, he should feel obliged to him."but i am not joking; i was never farther from it," remonstrated the baron."well, i am glad to hear that," said the genius, looking very grim, "because a joke, without any figure of speech, is the death of me.  come!  quit this dreary world at once.""i don't know," said the baron, playing with the knife; "it's a dreary one certainly, but i don't think yours is much better, for you have not the appearance of being particularly comfortable.  that puts me in mind - what security have i, that i shall be any the better for going out of the world after all!" he cried, starting up; "i never thought of that.""dispatch," cried the figure, gnashing its teeth."keep off!" said the baron, "i'll brood over miseries no longer, but put a good face on the matter, and try the fresh air and the bears again; and if that don't do, i'll talk to the baroness soundly, and cut the von swillenhausens dead."  with this the baron fell into his chair, and laughed so loud and boisterously, that the room rang with it.the figure fell back a pace or two, regarding the baron meanwhile with a look of intense terror, and when he had ceased, caught up the stake, plunged it violently into its body, uttered a frightful howl, and disappeared.von koëldwethout never saw it again.  having once made up his mind to action, he soon brought the baroness and the von swillenhausens to reason, and died many years afterwards; not a rich man that i am aware of, but certainly a happy one:  leaving behind him a numerous family, who had been carefully educated in bear- and boar-hunting under his own personal eye.  and my advice to all men is, that if ever they become hipped and melancholy from similar causes as very many men do, they look at both sides of the question, applying a magnifying glass to the best one; and if they still feel tempted to retire without leave, that they smoke a large pipe and drink a full bottle first, and profit by the laudable example of the baron of grogzwig.he was very reluctant to take precedence of so many respected members of the family, by beginning the round of stories they were to relate as they sat in a goodly circle by the christmas fire; and he modestly suggested that it would be more correct if "john our esteemed host" (whose health he begged to drink) would have the kindness to begin. for as to himself, he said, he was so little used to lead the way that really--but as they all cried out here, that he must begin, and agreed with one voice that he might, could, would, and should begin, he left off rubbing his hands, and took his legs out from under his armchair, and did begin.i have no doubt (said the poor relation) that i shall surprise the assembled members of our family, and particularly john our esteemed host to whom we are so much indebted for the great hospitality with which he has this day entertained us, by the confession i am going to make. but, if you do me the honour to be surprised at anything that falls from a person so unimportant in the family as i am, i can only say that i shall be scrupulously accurate in all i relate.i am not what i am supposed to be. i am quite another thing. perhaps before i go further, i had better glance at what i am supposed to be.it is supposed, unless i mistake--the assembled members of our family will correct me if i do, which is very likely (here the poor relation looked mildly about him for contradiction); that i am nobody's enemy but my own. that i never met with any particular success in anything. that i failed in business because i was unbusiness-like and credulous--in not being prepared for the interested designs of my partner. that i failed in love, because i was ridiculously trustful--in thinking it impossible that christiana could deceive me. that i failed in my expectations from my uncle chill, on account of not being as sharp as he could have wished in worldly matters. that, through life, i have been rather put upon and disappointed in a general way. that i am at present a bachelor of between fifty-nine and sixty years of age, living on a limited income in the form of a quarterly allowance, to which i see that john our esteemed host wishes me to make no further allusion.the supposition as to my present pursuits and habits is to the following effect.i live in a lodging in the clapham road--a very clean back room, in a very respectable house--where i am expected not to be at home in the day-time, unless poorly; and which i usually leave in the morning at nine o'clock, on pretence of going to business. i take my breakfast--my roll and butter, and my half-pint of coffee--at the old-established coffee-shop near westminster bridge; and then i go into the city--i don't know why--and sit in garraway's coffee house, and on 'change, and walk about, and look into a few offices and counting-houses where some of my relations or acquaintance are so good as to tolerate me, and where i stand by the fire if the weather happens to be cold. i get through the day in this way until five o'clock, and then i dine: at a cost, on the average, of one and threepence. having still a little money to spend on my evening's entertainment, i look into the old-established coffee-shop as i go home, and take my cup of tea, and perhaps my bit of toast. so, as the large hand of the clock makes its way round to the morning hour again, i make my way round to the clapham road again, and go to bed when i get to my lodging--fire being expensive, and being objected to by the family on account of its giving trouble and making a dirt.sometimes, one of my relations or acquaintances is so obliging as to ask me to dinner. those are holiday occasions, and then i generally walk in the park. i am a solitary man, and seldom walk with anybody. not that i am avoided because i am shabby; for i am not at all shabby, having always a very good suit of black on (or rather oxford mixture, which has the appearance of black and wears much better); but i have got into a habit of speaking low, and being rather silent, and my spirits are not high, and i am sensible that i am not an attractive companion.the only exception to this general rule is the child of my first cousin, little frank. i have a particular affection for that child, and he takes very kindly to me. he is a diffident boy by nature; and in a crowd he is soon run over, as i may say, and forgotten. he and i, however, get on exceedingly well. i have a fancy that the poor child will in time succeed to my peculiar position in the family. we talk but little; still, we understand each other. we walk about, hand in hand; and without much speaking he knows what i mean, and i know what he means. when he was very little indeed, i used to take him to the windows of the toy-shops, and show him the toys inside. it is surprising how soon he found out that i would have made him a great many presents if i had been in circumstances to do it.little frank and i go and look at the outside of the monument--he is very fond of the monument--and at the bridges, and at all the sights that are free. on two of my birthdays, we have dined on e-la-mode beef, and gone at half-price to the play, and been deeply interested. i was once walking with him in lombard street, which we often visit on account of my having mentioned to him that there are great riches there--he is very fond of lombard street--when a gentleman said to me as he passed by, "sir, your little son has dropped his glove." i assure you, if you will excuse my remarking on so trivial a circumstance, this accidental mention of the child as mine, quite touched my heart and brought the foolish tears into my eyes.when little frank is sent to school in the country, i shall be very much at a loss what to do with myself, but i have the intention of walking down there once a month and seeing him on a half holiday. i am told he will then be at play upon the heath; and if my visits should be objected to, as unsettling the child, i can see him from a distance without his seeing me, and walk back again. his mother comes of a highly genteel family, and rather disapproves, i am aware, of our being too much together. i know that i am not calculated to improve his retiring disposition; but i think he would miss me beyond the feeling of the moment if we were wholly separated.when i die in the clapham road, i shall not leave much more in this world than i shall take out of it; but, i happen to have a miniature of a bright-faced boy, with a curling head, and an open shirt-frill waving down his bosom (my mother had it taken for me, but i can't believe that it was ever like), which will be worth nothing to sell, and which i shall beg may he given to frank. i have written my dear boy a little letter with it, in which i have told him that i felt very sorry to part from him, though bound to confess that i knew no reason why i should remain here. i have given him some short advice, the best in my power, to take warning of the consequences of being nobody's enemy but his own; and i have endeavoured to comfort him for what i fear he will consider a bereavement, by pointing out to him, that i was only a superfluous something to every one but him; and that having by some means failed to find a place in this great assembly, i am better out of it.such (said the poor relation, clearing his throat and beginning to speak a little louder) is the general impression about me. now, it is a remarkable circumstance which forms the aim and purpose of my story, that this is all wrong. this is not my life, and these are not my habits. i do not even live in the clapham road. comparatively speaking, i am very seldom there. i reside, mostly, in a--i am almost ashamed to say the word, it sounds so full of pretension--in a castle. i do not mean that it is an old baronial habitation, but still it is a building always known to every one by the name of a castle. in it, i preserve the particulars of my history; they run thus:it was when i first took john spatter (who had been my clerk) into partnership, and when i was still a young man of not more than five- and-twenty, residing in the house of my uncle chill, from whom i had considerable expectations, that i ventured to propose to christiana. i had loved christiana a long time. she was very beautiful, and very winning in all respects. i rather mistrusted her widowed mother, who i feared was of a plotting and mercenary turn of mind; but, i thought as well of her as i could, for christiana's sake. i never had loved any one but christiana, and she had been all the world, and far more than all the world, to me, from our childhood!christiana accepted me with her mother's consent, and i was rendered very happy indeed. my life at my uncle chill's was of a spare dull kind, and my garret chamber was as dull, and bare, and cold, as an upper prison room in some stern northern fortress. but, having christiana's love, i wanted nothing upon earth. i would not have changed my lot with any human being.avarice was, unhappily, my uncle chill's master-vice. though he was rich, he pinched, and scraped, and clutched, and lived miserably. as christiana had no fortune, i was for some time a little fearful of confessing our engagement to him; but, at length i wrote him a letter, saying how it all truly was. i put it into his hand one night, on going to bed.as i came down-stairs next morning, shivering in the cold december air; colder in my uncle's unwarmed house than in the street, where the winter sun did sometimes shine, and which was at all events enlivened by cheerful faces and voices passing along; i carried a heavy heart towards the long, low breakfast-room in which my uncle sat. it was a large room with a small fire, and there was a great bay window in it which the rain had marked in the night as if with the tears of houseless people. it stared upon a raw yard, with a cracked stone pavement, and some rusted iron railings half uprooted, whence an ugly out-building that had once been a dissecting-room (in the time of the great surgeon who had mortgaged the house to my uncle), stared at it.we rose so early always, that at that time of the year we breakfasted by candle-light. when i went into the room, my uncle was so contracted by the cold, and so huddled together in his chair behind the one dim candle, that i did not see him until i was close to the table.as i held out my hand to him, he caught up his stick (being infirm, he always walked about the house with a stick), and made a blow at me, and said, "you fool!""uncle," i returned, "i didn't expect you to be so angry as this." nor had i expected it, though he was a hard and angry old man."you didn't expect!" said he; "when did you ever expect? when did you ever calculate, or look forward, you contemptible dog?""these are hard words, uncle!""hard words? feathers, to pelt such an idiot as you with," said he. "here! betsy snap! look at him!"betsy snap was a withered, hard-favoured, yellow old woman--our only domestic--always employed, at this time of the morning, in rubbing my uncle's legs. as my uncle adjured her to look at me, he put his lean grip on the crown of her head, she kneeling beside him, and turned her face towards me. an involuntary thought connecting them both with the dissecting room, as it must often have been in the surgeon's time, passed across my mind in the midst of my anxiety."look at the snivelling milksop!" said my uncle. "look at the baby! this is the gentleman who, people say, is nobody's enemy but his own. this is the gentleman who can't say no. this is the gentleman who was making such large profits in his business that he must needs take a partner, t'other day. this is the gentleman who is going to marry a wife without a penny, and who falls into the hands of jezabels who are speculating on my death!"i knew, now, how great my uncle's rage was; for nothing short of his being almost beside himself would have induced him to utter that concluding word, which he held in such repugnance that it was never spoken or hinted at before him on any account."on my death," he repeated, as if he were defying me by defying his own abhorrence of the word. "on my death--death--death! but i'll spoil the speculation. eat your last under this roof, you feeble wretch, and may it choke you!"you may suppose that i had not much appetite for the breakfast to which i was bidden in these terms; but, i took my accustomed seat. i saw that i was repudiated henceforth by my uncle; still i could bear that very well, possessing christiana's heart.he emptied his basin of bread and milk as usual, only that he took it on his knees with his chair turned away from the table where i sat. when he had done, he carefully snuffed out the candle; and the cold, slate-coloured, miserable day looked in upon us."now, mr. michael," said he, "before we part, i should like to have a word with these ladies in your presence.""as you will, sir," i returned; "but you deceive yourself, and wrong us, cruelly, if you suppose that there is any feeling at stake in this contract but pure, disinterested, faithful love."to this, he only replied, "you lie!" and not one other word.we went, through half-thawed snow and half-frozen rain, to the house where christiana and her mother lived. my uncle knew them very well. they were sitting at their breakfast, and were surprised to see us at that hour."your servant, ma'am," said my uncle to the mother. "you divine the purpose of my visit, i dare say, ma'am. i understand there is a world of pure, disinterested, faithful love cooped up here. i am happy to bring it all it wants, to make it complete. i bring you your son-in-law, ma'am--and you, your husband, miss. the gentleman is a perfect stranger to me, but i wish him joy of his wise bargain."he snarled at me as he went out, and i never saw him again.it is altogether a mistake (continued the poor relation) to suppose that my dear christiana, over-persuaded and influenced by her mother, married a rich man, the dirt from whose carriage wheels is often, in these changed times, thrown upon me as she rides by. no, no. she married me.the way we came to be married rather sooner than we intended, was this. i took a frugal lodging and was saving and planning for her sake, when, one day, she spoke to me with great earnestness, and said:"my dear michael, i have given you my heart. i have said that i loved you, and i have pledged myself to be your wife. i am as much yours through all changes of good and evil as if we had been married on the day when such words passed between us. i know you well, and know that if we should be separated and our union broken off, your whole life would be shadowed, and all that might, even now, be stronger in your character for the conflict with the world would then be weakened to the shadow of what it is!""god help me, christiana!" said i. "you speak the truth.""michael!" said she, putting her hand in mine, in all maidenly devotion, "let us keep apart no longer. it is but for me to say that i can live contented upon such means as you have, and i well know you are happy. i say so from my heart. strive no more alone; let us strive together. my dear michael, it is not right that i should keep secret from you what you do not suspect, but what distresses my whole life. my mother: without considering that what you have lost, you have lost for me, and on the assurance of my faith: sets her heart on riches, and urges another suit upon me, to my misery. i cannot bear this, for to bear it is to be untrue to you. i would rather share your struggles than look on. i want no better home than you can give me. i know that you will aspire and labour with a higher courage if i am wholly yours, and let it be so when you will!"i was blest indeed, that day, and a new world opened to me. we were married in a very little while, and i took my wife to our happy home. that was the beginning of the residence i have spoken of; the castle we have ever since inhabited together, dates from that time. all our children have been born in it. our first child--now married--was a little girl, whom we called christiana. her son is so like little frank, that i hardly know which is which.the current impression as to my partner's dealings with me is also quite erroneous. he did not begin to treat me coldly, as a poor simpleton, when my uncle and i so fatally quarrelled; nor did he afterwards gradually possess himself of our business and edge me out. on the contrary, he behaved to me with the utmost good faith and honour.matters between us took this turn:- on the day of my separation from my uncle, and even before the arrival at our counting-house of my trunks (which he sent after me, not carriage paid), i went down to our room of business, on our little wharf, overlooking the river; and there i told john spatter what had happened. john did not say, in reply, that rich old relatives were palpable facts, and that love and sentiment were moonshine and fiction. he addressed me thus:"michael," said john, "we were at school together, and i generally had the knack of getting on better than you, and making a higher reputation.""you had, john," i returned."although" said john, "i borrowed your books and lost them; borrowed your pocket-money, and never repaid it; got you to buy my damaged knives at a higher price than i had given for them new; and to own to the windows that i had broken.""all not worth mentioning, john spatter," said i, "but certainly true.""when you were first established in this infant business, which promises to thrive so well," pursued john, "i came to you, in my search for almost any employment, and you made me your clerk.""still not worth mentioning, my dear john spatter," said i; "still, equally true.""and finding that i had a good head for business, and that i was really useful to the business, you did not like to retain me in that capacity, and thought it an act of justice soon to make me your partner.""still less worth mentioning than any of those other little circumstances you have recalled, john spatter," said i; "for i was, and am, sensible of your merits and my deficiencies.""now, my good friend," said john, drawing my arm through his, as he had had a habit of doing at school; while two vessels outside the windows of our counting-house--which were shaped like the stern windows of a ship--went lightly down the river with the tide, as john and i might then be sailing away in company, and in trust and confidence, on our voyage of life; "let there, under these friendly circumstances, be a right understanding between us. you are too easy, michael. you are nobody's enemy but your own. if i were to give you that damaging character among our connexion, with a shrug, and a shake of the head, and a sigh; and if i were further to abuse the trust you place in me--""but you never will abuse it at all, john," i observed."never!" said he; "but i am putting a case--i say, and if i were further to abuse that trust by keeping this piece of our common affairs in the dark, and this other piece in the light, and again this other piece in the twilight, and so on, i should strengthen my strength, and weaken your weakness, day by day, until at last i found myself on the high road to fortune, and you left behind on some bare common, a hopeless number of miles out of the way.""exactly so," said i."to prevent this, michael," said john spatter, "or the remotest chance of this, there must be perfect openness between us. nothing must be concealed, and we must have but one interest.""my dear john spatter," i assured him, "that is precisely what i mean.""and when you are too easy," pursued john, his face glowing with friendship, "you must allow me to prevent that imperfection in your nature from being taken advantage of, by any one; you must not expect me to humour it--""my dear john spatter," i interrupted, "i don't expect you to humour it. i want to correct it.""and i, too," said john."exactly so!" cried i. "we both have the same end in view; and, honourably seeking it, and fully trusting one another, and having but one interest, ours will be a prosperous and happy partnership.""i am sure of it!" returned john spatter. and we shook hands most affectionately.i took john home to my castle, and we had a very happy day. our partnership throve well. my friend and partner supplied what i wanted, as i had foreseen that he would, and by improving both the business and myself, amply acknowledged any little rise in life to which i had helped him.i am not (said the poor relation, looking at the fire as he slowly rubbed his hands) very rich, for i never cared to be that; but i have enough, and am above all moderate wants and anxieties. my castle is not a splendid place, but it is very comfortable, and it has a warm and cheerful air, and is quite a picture of home.our eldest girl, who is very like her mother, married john spatter's eldest son. our two families are closely united in other ties of attachment. it is very pleasant of an evening, when we are all assembled together--which frequently happens--and when john and i talk over old times, and the one interest there has always been between us.i really do not know, in my castle, what loneliness is. some of our children or grandchildren are always about it, and the young voices of my descendants are delightful--o, how delightful!--to me to hear. my dearest and most devoted wife, ever faithful, ever loving, ever helpful and sustaining and consoling, is the priceless blessing of my house; from whom all its other blessings spring. we are rather a musical family, and when christiana sees me, at any time, a little weary or depressed, she steals to the piano and sings a gentle air she used to sing when we were first betrothed. so weak a man am i, that i cannot bear to hear it from any other source. they played it once, at the theatre, when i was there with little frank; and the child said wondering, "cousin michael, whose hot tears are these that have fallen on my hand!"such is my castle, and such are the real particulars of my life therein preserved. i often take little frank home there. he is very welcome to my grandchildren, and they play together. at this time of the year--the christmas and new year time--i am seldom out of my castle. for, the associations of the season seem to hold me there, and the precepts of the season seem to teach me that it is well to be there."and the castle is--" observed a grave, kind voice among the company."yes. my castle," said the poor relation, shaking his head as he still looked at the fire, "is in the air. john our esteemed host suggests its situation accurately. my castle is in the air! i have done. will you be so good as to pass the story?"the first of april came dark and stormy, with silver whips of lightning cracking open the lowering clouds that seemed to skim the treetops. my brother tom and i, recovering from chest colds, tired of reading and listening to the radio, turned to the big living-room window of our house on syringa street."here they come, mother," cried tom when a big truck drove up in the teeming rain and stopped in front of the empty cottage across the street. mother hurried in from the kitchen and we three looked out. that truck, we knew, contained the duvitch family and all their earthly possessions. mr. duvitch and the biggest boy carefully helped mrs. duvitch from the seat and walked her into the house, supporting her all the way. another big boy, carrying a well-bundled baby, followed. a stream of young duvitches, accompanied by a big brown houndlike dog, poured out of the back of the truck and stood in a huddle in the rain.the barnyard sounds we heard escaped from two crates of hens the duvitches had fetched along and from a burlap bag in which a small flock of ducks had been stowed. while the livestock made noises according to its kind, the duvitches were quiet--almost solemn. they showed no elation at finding themselves in a new neighborhood and a very pretty neighborhood at that.all afternoon mother, tom and myself had been watching out for them, with rather mixed emotions. for the duvitches were immigrants and the first of their nationality to settle in our small smug town. coming to our obscure part of the state a year before, they had moved into a rotting old farmhouse two miles north of town, long abandoned. after the slashing hurricane of mid-march, the moss-rotten dwelling looked like the house in the fairy tale that remained standing only because it did not know which way to fall and the duvitches were forced to give it up."i wonder if mrs. duvitch is ill," murmured mother, looking through the rain at the dreary street scene."she must be," said tom. "i wonder if it'll be all right for andy and me to help 'em move in their stuff."this request, as mother well knew, was not inspired by genuine feeling for the duvitches but by curiosity and she shook her head. it was a strict family rule that any illness which kept us out of school would automatically keep us indoors.but the duvitches got along very well without help from us. as it turned out, they were old hands at moving. for years before coming to america they had been on the move, to escape starvation, separation, possible assassination. every child capable of two-legged locomotion pitched in and helped carry the things from the truck. in no time at all, it seemed, the truck was empty and the duvitches were shut up tight in their new home.that was the signal for mother to step into the kitchen. she returned swathed in her hooded raincoat, carrying a basket containing a vacuum jug of chicken soup, a baked tuna fish dish, steaming hot; a loaf of fresh bread and a chocolate cake. these she took to the house across the street and gave basket and all to the boy who answered her knock. it wasn't her plan to stop for a visit that day but to wait a week or so and call when the duvitches were all settled.the next day when the three of us--mother, tom and myself--were having lunch, we heard a faint tap at the back door. i answered it and there stood a pale dark-eyed boy, looking very solemn, holding our basket. it contained the empty vacuum jug, casserole dish and cake plate, all of which shone, and a tiny very shapely potted rose tree, in exquisite pink-tipped bud, the handsomest plant--and the only plant of its kind--ever seen in that neighborhood."i send them a few scraps of food," murmured mother, a few seconds later, deeply touched, "and get this queenly gift!"that was our last traffic with the duvitch family for over two years. when mother stopped to visit them a week after their coming, the little girl who opened the door a few inches said, "mamma sick; she stay in bed today."mrs. duvitch never crossed the street to our house and mother, a rather formal woman, made no further attempts to see the family. but father disagreed when she remarked that she thought the duvitches probably wished to be left alone.syringa street seemed to be a friendly street. it was a crooked maple-shady country lane that wound through the town without losing its charm. the sidewalk here and there was almost lost in weeds and the ditches, in places, were brightened by clumps of orange day lilies. widely spaced cottages, some of them smothered in vines, only seemed to make the neighborhood more rural. there were brilliant flower gardens, vegetable plots, fruit trees--and a few henhouses.the children, who enjoyed all the benefits of country life while actually living in town, were quite numerous. behind the facades of the street's dwellings there was probably no more greed, envy, superstition or intolerance than lurked behind the doors of any average dwelling in any average american town. the cardinal virtues, no doubt, were all represented. yes, syringa street seemed to be a friendly street.but the duvitches were marked people. they were the one struggling family in a prosperous community--and poverty, amid prosperity, is often embarrassing and irritating to the prosperous. they were considered unattractive physically. they were so meek! the duvitches never fought back.the women started in on mrs. duvitch because she "never showed her face." it is true, she was rarely if ever seen in the daytime, emerging from her dwelling only after dark in warm weather, to sit on the veranda, where she found privacy behind the ragged trumpet creeper. but this gave rise to the rumor that she was the victim of an obscure skin disease and that every morning she shook scales out of the bed sheet. (when my father heard that one, he went out to the pantry and mixed himself a tall drink.)mr. duvitch, too, was classified as an untouchable. his job, a rather malodorous one, was with the local rendering plant as a laborer. it followed that the syringa street young, meeting him on the street, sometimes stopped their noses as they passed him by--a form of torment all the more acute when mr. duvitch had to share it with the children that happened to be with him.black hard luck seemed to be their lot. a few weeks after they moved to syringa street they suffered a tragedy they were all summer in recovering from--mr. duvitch lost two weeks' pay while gathering mushrooms in tamarack swamp. inside of a year and a half, three duvitch boys had lost, among them, by various mishaps, two fingers, one eye and an ear lobe. they were forever being cut up, bruised, mutilated by things falling, breaking, cracking and exploding.a mild case of typhoid, mass cases of whooping cough and measles--all plagued the family within a year of their arrival. their only bright spot here was dr. switzer, one of the town's kindliest souls. he declined to accept fees, but was several times seen leaving the duvitch cottage, carrying off a handsome house plant and looking very pleased. the duvitches' dog, kasimar, acted just like the family to which he belonged--like one of the world's poorest canine relations. he seemed to be afraid of his own shadow and no one had ever heard him bark or growl.because they cast their eyes on the sidewalk as one passed them by and spoke only when spoken to, the young duvitches, like their parents, were considered antisocial. they were regarded as born scavengers too, for they spent hours foraging in the town dump, where they often picked up their footgear, some of their pants and shirts and furnishings for the house as well. they went on country excursions to gather watercress, dandelion greens, mushrooms and wild berries; and the few apples and tomatoes they occasionally concealed under their blouses didn't make the farmers on whom they poached much poorer.tom and i raided tomato patches and robbed apple trees just for the fun of it. that first september four duvitches--irving, benny, abe and esther--registered at the local grammar school. mrs. lovejoy, the principal, said they were bright, conscientious, pathetically eager but almost pathologically shy. before she could put a stop to it, some of their classmates scoffed at the leaf, lard and black bread sandwiches they ate for lunch, huddled in one corner of the recreation room, dressed in their boiled-out ragpickers' clothes. after school they headed straight for home, never lingering on the playground.even the tradesmen to whom the duvitches gave good money were either curt with them or downright rude. mrs. frithjof kinsella, the proprietor of the general store and a big jolly viking who could be heard two blocks away, extended credit to almost everybody in town and had a way of insulting her customers so heartily that they all loved her for it. the duvitches, however, mrs. kinsella very carefully did not insult (a form of insult in itself) and neither did she extend them credit.but mother, remembering the potted rose tree, always had a friendly word and a smile for the young duvitches when she saw them and a bone for kasimar when he found courage to venture across the road. father was the only man on syringa street who tipped his hat to sixteen-year-old maria duvitch, when he met her coming home from her piece-work job in miller's box factory. it may have been that their european travail made it easy for them to endure such a trifle as humiliation in america."i think," said father one fine saturday morning in july two years after the duvitches had come to syringa street, "that it would be very pleasant for andy, tom and myself to pitch our tent out at durston's pond and spend the night. we could fish and swim. that is," he added, "if mother can spare us.""i can spare you very well," mother said cheerfully. she had a notion it did menfolk good to get away occasionally and in this instance the sacrifice came easily, because camp life was little to her liking.she packed a hamper of food, tom and i fetched a tent from the attic and father looked over his fishing tackle. an hour after lunch we were driving through rolling farm country out to durston's pond, four miles north of town.we often had the serene little lake all to ourselves but on our arrival that afternoon we found half a dozen male duvitches in possession. they had been fishing for several hours, casting from the shore, dropping their lines over the wooden bridge that spanned cat creek where it flowed into the pond and trolling for bass from a flat-bottomed rowboat.tom and i, philistines like our friends, ignored the duvitch boys but father went up to mr. duvitch, who was fishing from the shore, and put out his hand."good afternoon, mr. duvitch! it's nice to see you and the boys here. what a beautiful day! are mrs. duvitch and the girls all well?"mr. duvitch was a little fellow, a lean starveling of a man with watery blue eyes and a kicked-about look. gratitude for being agreeably noticed showed in his mosquito-bitten face as he took father's hand and his tremulous smile showed broken teeth."i know the mosquitoes are biting," father went on pleasantly, "but are the fish?"proudly, oh, so proudly, mr. duvitch exhibited the catch that would probably feed his family for the better part of a week: a fine mess of bass, perch and sunfish, all of them alive, as far as i could see, and swimming around in the oaken washtub in which they had been dropped. father gave mr. duvitch hearty congratulations and said we couldn't hope to do as well but that we'd try.we three pitched the tent on a little knoll over the pond, and then father, with a happy sigh, lay down on the blanket for a nap in the sun. tom and i played a game of chew-the-peg on the grassy bank above the water and, later on, made several trips to the tent, for the camera, the field glasses, the sun lotion.on a trip for a cold drink from the vacuum jug and to fetch towels and soap, we stopped to look again at the duvitches' catch of fish.mr. duvitch and the boys had moved away and were fishing in a small arm of the pond below us. none of them seemed visible. tom and i, our glances meeting over the big cake of soap in my hand, were similarly and wickedly inspired--the thing was irresistible. we held a brief whispering conversation; and then, egged on by him and quite willing on my own, i played a shameful trick on the duvitches, the memory of which will come back to the end of my days to plague me. without considering further, i dropped the cake of soap into the tub of fish."let's go," whispered tom after we had watched the soap sink to the bottom.we swam out to the raft, diving and frolicking in the deep water. after a while the duvitches, calling it a day, assembled at a spot on the shore below our tent, happy in the knowledge of a good catch to take home.in a little while tom and i could hear their muffled exclamations of disbelief and dismay. father woke up and joined our neighbors in a conclave, looking down at the tub of fish near his feet. after a few moments he produced the whistle he carried on all our country excursions and blew it piercingly three times, the proclamation of emergency. this meant that tom and i must come at once.looking as guilty as we felt, we swam in and joined the group gathering around the tub. in the midst of our stricken neighbors stood father, holding the half-melted cake of soap in his palm silently but accusingly, for the fish had perished miserably in the soapy water and were unfit to eat. not only had tom and i snatched precious food from their mouths but we had brazenly advertised the contempt in which we held them.father's eyes were narrow slits of blue fire in his white face. i had never seen him so angry. one look at tom and me told him everything. words would have been superfluous and my brother and i bowed our heads in acknowledgment of our guilt."you will begin," father said in a voice i didn't recognize, "by saying you're sorry."our stunned neighbor wiped his blinking eyes as he listened to our mumbled words, which father made us repeat when they were inaudible. but there was no hostility, no animosity toward us in the man and it was obvious also that he considered himself too humble to receive an apology, finding it, like most of life's troubles, a mockery to be endured without protest. his sons showed no resentment, either, only a kind of resignation in their minds, which carried almost atavistic memories of century-old oppression by country barons and landed gentry.one-eyed manny duvitch, as it turned out, had told father he had seen me drop something in the tub of fish (before he learned that it had been a cake of soap). now he looked guiltier than tom and i. because he had been the witness and accuser, it was as if he considered himself to be the troublemaker, deserving the punishment. the two real culprits were the young lords of the ruling manor, with unlimited license, exempt from chastisement. to manny, the fortunate, the well-to-do, were also the privileged."do you realize," said father coldly, looking from tom to me, "that in certain primitive communities the sort of stunt you've pulled would be punishable by death?"tom and i did not reply."turn over the tub," said father abruptly, addressing us as if we were strangers.we turned it over. the gray soapy water ran away in bubbly rivulets, disappearing in the coarse mat of turf, and the poisoned fish lay exposed on the grass--quiet, strangled, open-mouthed--and somehow looking as if they were mutely protesting their horrid unnatural fate."count the fish," father ordered us, his voice like steel.tom and i got down on our knees."how many are there?" demanded father."sixty-one," i said."how many bass?""twelve."father handed mr. duvitch two dollars, the price of a day's rental of the r owboat. then, looking both the avenging angel and executioner, he ordered tom and me, with our tackle and bait, off the land we had disgraced--into exile, out on durston's pond."and you are not to come back," he gave out in the same steely tones, "until you've caught sixty-one fish to repay mr. duvitch. see to it that among them you bring in at least a dozen bass."father stepped up to the tent on the knoll to fetch our shirts and dungarees. these he rolled into a tight ball and shot like a bolt into the rowboat. he then turned his back to us and, thus disowned, tom and i lost no time in rowing out on the pond. father's decisions, even with mother present, were never reversed and swift execution, from which there was no appeal, followed his sentences.out in the middle of the big pond we dropped anchor, threaded our steel rods and, baiting our hooks, began to fish. i knew that if it took us all summer to catch them, we dared not set foot ashore without sixty-one fish. almost at once tom pulled in a good- sized bass and ten minutes later two yellow perch were added to our string. the crestfallen duvitches went home. father threw himself on the blanket, furiously smoking a cigar. that was about four in the afternoon.oh, the mosquitoes! they were bad enough at the time, and while the light held, but after we had been fishing for three hours and had caught eight fish, they swarmed out of the swampland surrounding the pond in legions. after an hour of it we wanted to leap overboard. they got in our ears, our noses, our eyes, even in our mouths, and nestling in our hair, they bit through to our scalps. i remembered tales of indian prisoners in alaska, turned loose on the tundra by their captors, where they died of the mosquitoes in two hours. several times we slipped over the side of the boat, immersing ourselves in the water to escape the bloodthirsty clouds.the night dragged on while the whining swarms grew thicker."andy, what time is it?""ten o'clock, tom.""is that all?" tom groaned and pulled in another bass and killed six or eight mosquitoes in one slap. two hours passed and midnight was ghostly on durston's pond. the moon, bright as day, sailed high in the purple sky, dimming the starfire, casting a great white shaft of quivering radiance on the water, but it was all hideous. the big yellow disk sank in a gauzy cloudbank, then disappeared for good and the stars shone out with renewed splendor."andy, what time is it?""two o'clock, tom."the treetops whispered as if in conspiracy against us. owls hooted--mockingly we thought--and bats circled over our heads, making us feel thoroughly alone. our only solace was the campfire father kept burning near the tent, which flared like a beacon of light in the dark. we went on fishing as our tormentors bit and sang. each hour was an eternity of frenzy and i fairly panted for the light of dawn to come, but even now i cannot decide which was worse, that night with the mosquitoes on durston's pond or the following day in the blistering heat."andy--""it's four o'clock, tom, and we've got sixteen fish."dawn came but even i, a highly impressionable youngster of seventeen, did not enjoy that calm effulgent majesty of daybreak. a long stretch on durston's pond, under the july sun, still faced us.the rising sun was red, casting glimmering circles of rose-colored light on the windless surface of the pond. the mosquitoes thinned, the fish continued to bite. but as we fished the sun mounted steadily and by eleven it had fulfilled its awful prophecy and became a ball of fire in the cloudless skies. tom and i began to bake in the heat waves that shimmered over the pond and we were steamed in the scalding vapory mist."i wish it was night again, andy," groaned tom after sweating out two hours of it. "this is worse than the mosquitoes.""at least we won't get any infections from our bites, tom," i said feebly. "the sun's cauterizing them.""we might get sunstrokes, though. we're liable to, without our hats. but i don't care if i do. i'd rather be unconscious."tom was only fifteen and i think he hated me that day. i, the older, should have been his protector against participation in crime, not his accomplice. i wanted to row him in, then come back to finish the business alone, but there on the green eden-like shore stood father, stationed there barring the way.tom and i weighed our hooks down to the deep cold water. we caught two more bass and half a dozen sunfish.by one o'clock groups of people gathered on the shore, for word of the drama that was being enacted on durston's pond had spread through the town. some of the visitors praised father for his stern discipline; others berated him. he went right on reading his magazine and smoking his cigar, as indifferent to their praise as he was to their criticism.local fishermen who knew the lake and something about the angling ability of the average youngster made gloomy estimates as to the possible length of our exile on the water. a few had us fishing until the snow flew. they made bets too. would tom and i have the guts to stick it out? most of the bets were against us.but we sat there in the rowboat, without food, through the hottest day of the summer.no breeze stirred. no cloud obscured the sun. even the bird life of the swamp, usually a medley of song, was silent and dead. tom was drooping visibly in the glare and i tried hard not to look at his scorched face.between three and four we dropped lines in a school of yellow perch and pulled up no less than twenty. the bass continued to bite in the deep black holes off the swamp, which bristled with tree trunks. benumbed, half-blinded, moving like automatons, tom and i geared ourselves for the home stretch.when the sun, dropping low, had lost its fury and the hard blue enamel of the sky began to pale, i pulled up the thirteenth bass, which was our sixty first fish.turned lobster-red, fairly devoured, famished and drooping from lack of sleep, we put together our rods and with our remaining strength rowed to where father was waiting. he received us coolly, making no comment on our condition. at once he asked to see the fish and we held them up by the strings."count them," he said. obviously we would receive permission to land only when we had produced the required number, which was the price of our freedom."sixty-one," said tom."including thirteen bass," i added."very good," said father in businesslike tones. "we will now restore to mr. duvitch his rightful property."tom and i took care not to play the part of triumphant heroes, even of redeemed sinners--that would not have suited our parent. certainly, in appearance, we were more condemned than redeemed. but when we tottered out of the rowboat something in me was quietly rejoicing. i guessed that father was secretly proud of our fortitude and i realized, too, that all through the night he had suffered with us.we walked through the crowd of visitors on the lake shore, climbed into the car and silently drove to the duvitch cottage. mrs. duvitch and the children were not visible but we found mr. duvitch sitting on the porch.when he saw tom and me and we silently handed him the strings of fish, he gulped and swallowed hard. for a moment he could not speak. then, in a voice that was raw with emotion, he protested that he had not wished us to suffer so. suppose we had fallen overboard in the dark?"will you shake hands with the boys?" asked father.instead, mr. duvitch broke down. my brother and i did not know where to look and during those moments we suffered more acutely than we had suffered in the clouds of mosquitoes and under the broiling sun. after our neighbor had composed himself, he seized our hands and bowed his head over them. there was something biblical in the man's gesture. anyway, it was my greatest lesson in humility.when mother, who had heard about our exile on the pond from a neighbor, saw us she burst into tears. she tried to embrace us but we drew back painfully. while she was rubbing salves and ointments on our seared backs and necks, somebody knocked at the kitchen door and father opened it to find mrs. duvitch standing there--the first time she had crossed the street to our house.in her pale swaying hand mrs. duvitch held a porcelain teacup, ornamented with pink rosebuds and golden leaves--a relic from the old country and, as it turned out, her most cherished possession.her voice, thin and wispy from fright and shock, was difficult to follow. but we gathered that she had brought the teacup over as a peace offering and as a plea for our forgiveness to her family for the living purgatory, no matter whose fault, through which my brother and i had passed.when mother declined the teacup and assured mrs. duvitch that she would not have it otherwise with tom and me, our neighbor, unable to find her tongue, made a little eloquent sign with her hands that was for thanks and that looked like a silent blessing. she quietly turned and went away; and again i felt that i had witnessed a profound moment.mother continued her ministrations to tom and me and put us to bed. despite our skin, which stuck to sheet and pillowcase, we slept like creatures drugged."it is high time," tom and i heard father say calmly, sanely, to mother around noon next day when we woke up, "for this senseless feeling against the duvitches to stop and i'm willing to do still more to stop it. tonight we are having supper with them. i've just seen mr. duvitch and he remarked that since andy and tom caught the fish, he'd feel better if we all shared in them. i suggested a fish-fry picnic supper and with a few hints from me, and some encouragement, he invited us over. it may be an ordeal but we ought to be able to bear it."we walked across the street at six o'clock, not knowing what to expect. all the duvitches, dressed in their sunday best, bright and flushed and shining as we had never seen them, received us at the door as if we had been royalty. they looked at tom and me and delicately looked away--i shuddered when i thought of what my brother and i would have had to endure had this been any other family.instead of a wretched abode we found a scantily furnished home that shone with cleanliness and smelled of spicy garden pinks. in its almost barren simplicity there was something comely. a few of the stands, chairs and tables had the intimate quality of what is fashioned by the human hand. these, together with odds and ends the family had brought from the old country and others resurrected from the town dump and mended, painted, waxed and polished, made for a kind of native household harmony.the house plants (no window was without several) delighted mother. mrs. duvitch was raising little orange and lemon trees from seed and experimenting with a pineapple plant growing in a butter tub.at once we were conscious of a remarkable difference in the demeanor of the family. the children, thrilled by their first party, by the family's first recognition in this country, kept showing their pleasure in wide delighted smiles. i couldn't believe they were the same timid downcast youngsters one met on the street and saw in school; they seemed to have been touched by a wand. the duvitches' home was their castle: sustained and animated by the security of its four walls, shut away from a world of contempt and hostility, they were complete human beings. in their own house their true personalities emerged.as the host mr. duvitch was a man we were seeing for the first time. overjoyed to have neighbors in his house, he was so full of himself that i was conscious of an invisible stature in him which made him seem quite as tall as father. he beamed and feasted his eyes on us. saying very little, he managed to make us feel a great deal and he constantly sought his wife's eyes with glances of delight over the wonder of what was happening.david, the oldest boy, helped his father serve a bottle of homemade blackberry wine. we ate fried fish and good food of the american picnic variety at a long plank table set out in the back yard under an apple tree. the young duvitches passed things politely, never helping themselves first, and their thanks upon receiving a dish were almost ceremonial. they waited patiently for their plates and ate every scrap of food.father kept the conversation going. his every word was listened to, every childish eye riveted on him while he spoke.tom and i, fascinated by the family's metamorphosis, almost forgot about our blisters and our stings. as father told stories and jokes, we discovered that the duvitches had a gift for gaiety, for laughter, all but extinguished but still capable of resurrection. they were merry people who had suffered too much. how strange to see the boys and girls throw back their heads and laugh when father said something that was funny, but not terribly funny.after supper we were ushered to the open summer kitchen, the coolest room in the house, for entertainment. david played folk songs on his accordion. mr. duvitch turned out to be an amateur ventriloquist; he made the dog kasimar talk polish, the cat jan talk russian and a doll named sophia, talk english. mrs. duvitch read aloud to us, translating as she went along, a letter her mother had received from the great actress modjeska, whom her family had known long ago.i could tell that the duvitches were a great revelation to father and that he had enjoyed the evening tremendously."to think," he murmured as if talking to himself, while we were crossing the street, "that they should turn out to be gentle people of cultivation and accomplishment. looked down on and ignored by their inferiors!"i like to believe that the oil paintings of george washington, abraham lincoln and thomas jefferson, which hung in our living room, helped to establish the duvitches in our community. even the fountain tinkling in the lily pool in our garden might have helped. in that town, oil paintings and flowing fountains were the symbols of wealth and aristocracy. only a few mansions on sycamore hill were adorned with such.because our home was graced with these symbols, we had always been classified with the town's great, which gave us such prestige in the neighborhood that people often followed our lead. obviously the duvitches were important in father's eyes, shown by the rigorous sentence he had imposed on tom and me for our misuse of them. added to that, we had recognized the family by taking a meal with them in their own house.people, often persuaded to accept what we accepted, to believe what we believed, began to think the duvitches must really count, after all. most of our neighbors decided that if they were good enough for a highly educated man like father (the only college graduate on syringa street), they were good enough for them. the galvanized community began to look upon things in a different light and it soon became the fashion to give the duvitches the favorable nod.mother invited mrs. duvitch to a tea party, where her delicate manners, and the fine needlework which engaged her, won the approval of the local housewives who were present. on hot days our neighbor asked one of her big boys to carry the pineapple plant (which mother had advertised well) into the back yard; and since botanical rarities were irresistible in that town of gardens, people were soon stopping by the fence for a look at the tropical specimen.after a while mrs. duvitch found courage to ask these people into her house and, if mr. duvitch was at home, he told the visitors stories about life in the old country. it was then that the neighborhood learned about the family's european past.the children ceased stopping their noses when mr. duvitch passed them by and it wasn't long before the young duvitches were able to enjoy outside companionship when they found time to play. they blossomed out in school and they were soon shining in school plays and festivals. even kasimar began to take on the ways of an american dog, daring to bark and growl on occasion.nathan duvitch, who was seventeen, could throw and hit a baseball as far as anybody his age in town. when i learned this, and let it be known, he was asked to join one of the local ball clubs. david, invited to play his accordion at a country dance, turned out to be a magician with the instrument and ended up being one of the community's most popular players. mrs. frithjof kinsella gave one-eyed manny an after-school job in her store and later on told mother he was worth three boys put together.the community presently had reason to be grateful for mrs. duvitch's presence. it turned out that she had a great gift for nursing, and no fear of death, no fear of disease, contagious or otherwise. in times of severe illness dr. switzer often suggested that she be sent for--her own girls could take over at home. there were almost no nurses in town and the nearest hospital was over a hundred miles away. when mrs. duvitch quietly slipped into a sickroom, she never failed to bring along a sedative influence, a kind of sanity. after an hour or two of her serene presence, the patient was calmed and comforted and the family reassured.people began to turn to the duvitches in all kinds of trouble. a boy who got in a bad scrape, a bitter family quarrel, a baby who had come into the world deformed--the elder duvitches, with their old-world wisdom and gift for accepting the inevitable, could sit by the hour and argue gently and convincingly against disgrace, false pride, grief, fear.most surprising of all, mr. duvitch, in one respect, turned out to be characteristically american. one saturday afternoon when my ball team was playing nathan's, father met him in the local ball park."chust like de american boy," mr. duvitch exploded when nathan made a timely hit that drove in two runs. our neighbor choked with pride and went on: "nathan's battering averich three hunnert tventy-sevened!"on a cold snowy afternoon in winter mr. duvitch stopped at our house and presented father (who had enormous hands, much bigger than any of the duvitches') with a handsome pair of leather mittens, lined with fur, which had a slightly acrid ashy odor. "no doubt one of the boys resurrected them from a heap of ashes in the dump," remarked father, drawing on the mittens, which fitted perfectly. "why should i value them any the less? who would have dreamed that the duvitches would have so much more to offer us than we have to offer them?"peter morton woke with a start to face the first light. rain tapped against the glass. it was january the fifth.he looked across a table on which a night-light had guttered into a pool of water, at the other bed. francis morton was still asleep, and peter lay down again with his eyes on his brother.  it amused him to imagine it was himself whom he watched, the same hair, the same eyes, the same lips and line of cheek. but the thought palled, and the mind went back to the fact which lent the day importance. it was the fifth of january.  he could hardly believe a year had passed since mrs henne-falcon had given her last children's party.francis turned suddenly upon his back and threw an arm across his face, blocking his mouth. peter's heart began to beat fast, not with pleasure now but with uneasiness. he sat up and called across the table, "wake up." francis's shoulders shook and he waved a clenched fist in the air, but his eyes remained closed. to peter morton the whole room seemed to darken, and he had the impression of a great bird swooping. he cried again, "wake up," and once more there was silver light and the touch of rain on the windows.francis rubbed his eyes. "did you call out?"' he asked."you are having a bad dream," peter said.  already experience had taught him how far their minds reflected each other. but he was the elder, by a matter of minutes, and that brief extra interval of light, while his brother still struggled in pain and darkness, had given him self-reliance and an instinct of protection towards the other who was  afraid of so many things."i dreamed that i was dead," francis said."what was it like?"' peter asked."i can't remember," francis said."you dreamed of a big bird.""did i?"the two lay silent in bed facing each other, the same green eyes, the same nose tilting at the tip, the same firm lips, and the same premature modelling of the chin. the fifth of january, peter thought again, his mind drifting idly from the image of cakes to the prizes which might be won. egg-and-spoon races, spearing apples in basins of water, blind man's buff."i don't want to go," francis said  suddenly. "i suppose joyce will be there â mabel warren." hateful to him, the thought of a party shared with those two. they were older than he. joyce was eleven and mabel warren thirteen. the long pigtails swung superciliously to a masculine stride. their sex humiliated him, as they watched him fumble with his egg, from under lowered scornful lids. and last year â he turned his face away from peter, his cheeks scarlet."what's the matter?"' peter asked."oh, nothing. i don't think i'm well. i've got a cold. i oughtn't to go to the party."peter was puzzled. "but francis,  is it a bad cold?""it will be a bad cold if i go to the party.  perhaps i shall die.""then you mustn't go," peter said, prepared  to solve all difficulties with one plain sentence, and francis let his nerves relax, ready to leave everything to peter. but though he was grateful he did not turn his face towards his brother. his cheeks still bore the badge of a shameful memory, of the game of hide and seek last year in the darkened house, and of how he had screamed when mabel warren put her hand suddenly upon his arm. he had not heard her coming. girls were like that. their shoes never squeaked. no boards whined under the tread. they slunk like cats on padded claws.when the nurse came in with hot water francis lay tranquil leaving everything to peter. peter said, "nurse, francis has got a cold."the tall starched woman laid the towels across the cans and said, without turning, "the washing won't be back till tomorrow. you must lend him some of your handkerchiefs.""but, nurse," peter asked, "hadn't he better stay in bed?""we'll take him for a good walk this morning," the nurse said. "wind'll blow away the germs. get up now, both of you," and she closed the door behind her."i'm sorry," peter said. "why don't you just stay in bed? i'll tell mother you felt too ill to get up." but rebellion against destiny was not in francis's power. if he stayed in bed they would come up and tap his chest and put a thermometer in his mouth and look at his tongue, and they would discover he was malingering. it was true he felt ill, a sick empty sensation in his stomach and a rapidly beating heart, but he knew the cause was only fear, fear of the party, fear of being made to hide by himself in the dark, uncompanioned by peter and with no night-light to make a blessed breach."no, i'll get up," he said, and then with sudden desperation, "but i won't go to mrs henne-falcon's party. i swear on the bible i won't." now surely all would be well, he thought. god would not allow him to break so solemn an oath. he would show him a way. there was all the morning before him and all the afternoon until four o'clock. no need to worry when the grass was still crisp with the early frost. anything might happen. he might cut himself or break his leg or really catch a bad cold. god would manage somehow.he had such confidence in god that when at breakfast his mother said, "i hear you have a cold, francis," he made light of it. "we should have heard more about it," his mother said with irony, "if there was not a party this evening," and francis smiled, amazed and daunted by her ignorance of him.his happiness would have lasted longer if, out for a walk that morning, he had not met joyce. he was alone with his nurse, for peter had leave to finish a rabbit-hutch in the woodshed. if peter had been there he would have cared less; the nurse was peter's nurse also, but now it was as though she were employed only for his sake, because he could not be trusted to go for a walk alone. joyce was only two years older and she was by herself.she came striding towards them, pigtails flapping. she glanced scornfully at francis and spoke with ostentation to the nurse. "hello, nurse. are you bringing francis to the party this evening? mabel and i are coming." and she was off again down the street in the direction of mabel warren's home, consciously alone and self-sufficient in the long empty road."such a nice girl," the nurse said. but francis was silent, feeling again the jump-jump of his heart, realizing how soon the hour of the party would arrive. god had done nothing for him, and the minutes flew.they flew too quickly to plan any evasion, or even to prepare his heart for the coming ordeal. panic nearly overcame him when, all unready, he found himself standing on the doorstep, with coat-collar turned up against a cold wind, and the nurse's electric torch making a short trail through the darkness. behind him were the lights of the hall and the sound of a servant laying the table for dinner, which his mother and father would eat alone. he was nearly overcome by the desire to run back into the house and call out to his mother that he would not go to the party, that he dared not go. they could not make him go. he could almost hear himself saying those final words, breaking down for ever the barrier of ignorance which saved his mind from his parents' knowledge. "i'm afraid of going. i won't go. i daren't go. they'll  make me hide in the dark, and i'm afraid of the dark. i'll scream and scream and scream."he could see the expression of amazement on his mother's face, and then the cold confidence of a grown-up's retort. "don't be silly. you must go. we've accepted mrs henne-falcon's invitation."but they couldn't make him go; hesitating on the doorstep while the nurse's feet crunched across the frost-covered grass to the gate, he knew that. he would answer: "you can say i'm ill. i won't go. i'm afraid of the dark." and his mother: "don't be silly. you know there's nothing to be afraid of in the dark." but he knew the falsity of that reasoning; he knew how they taught also that there was nothing to fear in death, and how fearfully they avoided the idea of it. but they couldn't make him go to the party. "i'll scream. i'll scream.""francis, come along." he heard the nurse's voice across the dimly phosphorescent lawn and saw the yellow circle of her torch wheel from tree to shrub. "i'm coming," he called with despair; he couldn't bring himself to lay bare his last secrets and end reserve between his mother and himself, for there was still in the last resort a further appeal possible to mrs henne-falcon. he comforted himself with that, as he advanced steadily across the hall, very small, towards her enormous bulk. his heart beat unevenly, but he had control now over his voice, as he said with meticulous accent, "good evening,  mrs henne-falcon. it was very good of you to ask me to your party." with his strained face lifted towards the curve of her breasts, and his polite set speech, he was like an old withered man. as a twin he was in many ways an only child. to address peter was to speak to his own image in a mirror, an image a little altered by a flaw in the glass, so as to throw back less a likeness of what he was than of what he wished to be, what he would be without his unreasoning fear of darkness, footsteps of strangers, the flight of bats in dusk-filled gardens."sweet child," said mrs henne-falcon absent-mindedly, before, with a wave of her arms, as though the children were a flock of chickens, she whirled them into her set programme of entertainments: egg-and-spoon races, three-legged races, the spearing of apples, games which held for francis nothing worse than humiliation. and in the frequent intervals when nothing was required of him and he could stand alone in corners as far removed as possible from mabel warren's scornful gaze, he was able to plan how he might avoid the approaching terror of the dark. he knew there was nothing to fear until after tea, and not until he was sitting down in a pool of yellow radiance cast by the ten candles on colin henne-falcon's birthday cake did he become fully conscious of the imminence of what he feared. he heard joyce's high voice down the table, "after tea we are going to play hide and seek in the dark.""oh, no," peter said, watching francis's troubled face, "don't let's. we play that every year.""but it's in the programme," cried mabel warren. "i saw it myself. i looked over mrs henne-falcon's shoulder. five o'clock tea. a quarter to six to half past, hide and seek in the dark. it's all written down in the programme."peter did not argue, for if hide and seek had been inserted in mrs henne-falcon's programme, nothing which he could say would avert it. he asked for another piece of birthday cake and sipped his tea slowly. perhaps it might be possible to delay the game for a quarter of an hour, allow francis at least a few extra minutes to form a plan, but even in that peter failed, for children were already leaving the table in twos and threes. it was his third failure, and again he saw a great bird darken his brother's face with its wings. but he upbraided himself silently for his folly, and finished his cake encouraged by the memory of that adult refrain, "there's nothing to fear in the dark." the last to leave the table, the brothers came together to the hall to meet the mustering and impatient eyes of mrs henne-falcon."and now," she said, "we will play hide and seek in the dark."peter watched his brother and saw the lips tighten. francis, he knew, had feared this moment from the beginning of the party, had tried to meet it with courage and had abandoned the attempt. he must have prayed for cunning to evade the game, which was now welcomed with cries of excitement by all the other children. "oh, do let's." "we must pick  sides." "is any of the house out of bounds?"'  "where shall home be?"'"i think," said francis morton, approaching mrs henne-falcon, his eyes focused unwaveringly on her exuberant breasts, "it will be no use my playing. my nurse will be calling for me very soon.""oh, but your nurse can wait, francis," said mrs henne-falcon, while she clapped her hands together to summon to her side a few children who were  already straying up the wide staircase to upper floors. "your mother will never mind."that had been the limit of francis's cunning. he had refused to believe that so well-prepared an excuse could fail. all that he could say now, still in the precise tone which other children hated, thinking it a symbol of conceit, was, "i think i had better not play." he stood motionless, retaining, though afraid, unmoved features. but the knowledge of his terror, or the reflection of the terror itself, reached his brother's brain. for the moment, peter morton could have cried aloud with the fear of bright lights going out, leaving him alone in an island of dark surrounded by the gentle lappings of strange footsteps. then he remembered that the fear was not his own, but his brother's. he said impulsively to mrs henne-falcon, "please, i don't think francis should play. the dark makes him jump so." they were the wrong words. six children began to sing, "cowardy cowardy custard," turning torturing faces with the vacancy of wide sunflowers towards francis morton.without looking at his brother, francis said, "of course i'll play. i'm not afraid, i only thought â" but he was already forgotten by his human tormentors. the children scrambled round mrs henne-falcon, their shrill voices pecking at her with questions and suggestions."yes, anywhere in the house. we will turn out all the lights. yes, you can hide in the cupboards. you must stay hidden as long as you can. there will be no home."peter stood apart, ashamed of the clumsy manner in which he had tried to help his brother.  now he could feel, creeping in at the corners of  his brain, all francis's resentment of his championing. several children ran upstairs, and the lights on the top floor went out. darkness came down like the wings of a bat and settled on the landing. others began to put out the lights at the edge of the hall, till the children were all gathered in the central radiance of the chandelier, while the bats squatted round on hooded wings and waited for that, too, to be extinguished."you and francis are on the hiding side," a tall girl said, and then the light was gone, and the carpet wavered under his feet with the sibilance of footfalls, like small cold draughts, creeping away into corners."where's francis?"' he wondered. "if i join him he'll be less frightened of all these sounds." "these sounds" were the casing of silence: the squeak of a loose board, the cautious closing of a cupboard door, the whine of a finger drawn along polished wood.peter stood in the centre of the dark deserted floor, not listening but waiting for the idea of his brother's whereabouts to enter his brain. but francis crouched with fingers on his ears, eyes uselessly closed, mind numbed against impressions, and only a sense of strain could cross the gap of dark. then a voice called "coming", and as though his brother's self-possession had been shattered by the sudden cry, peter morton jumped with his fear.  but it was not his own fear. what in his brother was a burning panic was in him an altruistic emotion that left the reason unimpaired. "where, if i were francis, should i hide?"' and because he was, if not francis himself, at least a mirror to him, the answer was immediate. "between the oak bookcase on the left of the study door, and the leather settee." between the twins there could be no jargon of telepathy. they had been together in the womb, and they could not be parted.peter morton tiptoed towards francis's hiding-place. occasionally a board rattled, and because he feared to be caught by one of the  soft questers through the dark, he bent and untied his laces. a tag struck the floor and the metallic sound set a host of cautious feet moving in his direction. but by that time he was in his stockings and would have laughed inwardly at the pursuit had not the noise of someone stumbling on his abandoned shoes made his heart trip. no more boards revealed peter morton's progress.on stockinged feet he moved silently and  unerringly towards his object. instinct told him he was near the wall, and, extending a hand, he laid the fingers across his brother's face.francis did not cry out, but the leap of his own heart revealed to peter a proportion of francis's terror. "it's all right," he whispered, feeling down the squatting figure until he captured a clenched hand. "it's only me. i'll stay with you." and grasping the other tightly, he listened to the cascade of whispers his utterance had caused to fall. a hand touched the book-case close to peter's head and he was aware of how francis's fear continued in spite of his presence. it was less intense, more  bearable, he hoped, but it remained. he knew that it was his brother's fear and not his own that he experienced. the dark to him was only an absence of  light; the groping hand that of a familiar child. patiently he waited to be found.he did not speak again, for between francis and himself was the most intimate communion. by way of joined hands thought could flow more swiftly than lips could shape themselves round words. he could experience the whole progress of his brother's emotion, from the leap of panic at the unexpected contact to the steady pulse of fear, which now went on and on with the regularity of a heart-beat. peter morton thought with intensity, "i am here. you needn't be afraid. the lights will go on again soon. that rustle, that movement is nothing to fear. only joyce, only mabel warren." he bombarded the drooping form with thoughts of safety, but he was conscious that the fear continued. "they are beginning to whisper together. they are tired of looking for us. the lights will go on soon. we shall have won. don't be afraid. that was someone on the stairs. i believe it's mrs henne-falcon. listen. they are feeling for the lights." feet moving on a carpet, hands  brushing a wall, a curtain pulled apart, a clicking handle, the opening of a cupboard door.  in the case above their heads a loose book shifted under a touch. "only joyce, only mabel warren, only mrs henne-falcon," a crescendo of reassuring thought before the chandelier burst, like a fruit-tree, into bloom.the voice of the children rose shrilly into the radiance. "where's peter?"' "have you looked upstairs?"' "where's francis?"' but they were silenced again by mrs henne-falcon's scream. but she was not the first to notice francis morton's stillness, where he had collapsed against the wall at the touch of his brother's hand.  peter continued to hold the clenched fingers in an arid and puzzled grief. it was not merely that his  brother was dead. his brain, too young to realize the full paradox, wondered with an obscure self-pity why it was that the pulse of his brother's fear went on and on, when francis was now where he had always been told there was no more terror and no more--darkness.it had been raining in the valley of the sacramento. the north fork had overflowed its banks and rattlesnake creek was impassable. the few boulders that had marked the summer ford at simpson's crossing were obliterated by a vast sheet of water stretching to the foothills. the up stage was stopped at grangers; the last mail had been abandoned in the tules, the rider swimming for his life. "an area," remarked the "sierra avalanche," with pensive local pride, "as large as the state of massachusetts is now under water."nor was the weather any better in the foothills. the mud lay deep on the mountain road; wagons that neither physical force nor moral objurgation could move from the evil ways into which they had fallen, encumbered the track, and the way to simpson's bar was indicated by broken-down teams and hard swearing. and farther on, cut off and inaccessible, rained upon and bedraggled, smitten by high winds and threatened by high water, simpson's bar, on the eve of christmas day, 1862, clung like a swallow's nest to the rocky entablature and splintered capitals of table mountain, and shook in the blast.as night shut down on the settlement, a few lights gleamed through the mist from the windows of cabins on either side of the highway now crossed and gullied by lawless streams and swept by marauding winds. happily most of the population were gathered at thompson's store, clustered around a red-hot stove, at which they silently spat in some accepted sense of social communion that perhaps rendered conversation unnecessary. indeed, most methods of diversion had long since been exhausted on simpson's bar; high water had suspended the regular occupations on gulch and on river, and a consequent lack of money and whiskey had taken the zest from most illegitimate recreation. even mr. hamlin was fain to leave the bar with fifty dollars in his pocket -- the only amount actually realized of the large sums won by him in the successful exercise of his arduous profession. "ef i was asked," he remarked somewhat later, --"ef i was asked to pint out a purty little village where a retired sport as didn't care for money could exercise hisself, frequent and lively, i'd say simpson's bar; but for a young man with a large family depending on his exertions, it don't pay." as mr. hamlin's family consisted mainly of female adults, this remark is quoted rather to show the breadth of his humor than the exact extent of his responsibilities.howbeit, the unconscious objects of this satire sat that evening in the listless apathy begotten of idleness and lack of excitement. even the sudden splashing of hoofs before the door did not arouse them. dick bullen alone paused in the act of scraping out his pipe, and lifted his head, but no other one of the group indicated any interest in, or recognition of, the man who entered.it was a figure familiar enough to the company, and known in simpson's bar as "the old man." a man of perhaps fifty years; grizzled and scant of hair, but still fresh and youthful of complexion. a face full of ready, but not very powerful sympathy, with a chameleon-like aptitude for taking on the shade and color of contiguous moods and feelings. he had evidently just left some hilarious companions, and did not at first notice the gravity of the group, but clapped the shoulder of the nearest man jocularly, and threw himself into a vacant chair."jest heard the best thing out, boys! ye know smiley, over yar -- jim smiley - - funniest man in the bar? well, jim was jest telling the richest yarn about - -""smiley's a ---- fool," interrupted a gloomy voice."a particular ---- skunk," added another in sepulchral accents.a silence followed these positive statements. the old man glanced quickly around the group. then his face slowly changed. "that's so," he said reflectively, after a pause, "certingly a sort of a skunk and suthin of a fool. in course." he was silent for a moment as in painful contemplation of the unsavoriness and folly of the unpopular smiley. "dismal weather, ain't it?" he added, now fully embarked on the current of prevailing sentiment. "mighty rough papers on the boys, and no show for money this season. and tomorrow's christmas."there was a movement among the men at this announcement, but whether of satisfaction or disgust was not plain. "yes," continued the old man in the lugubrious tone he had, within the last few moments, unconsciously adopted, -- "yes, christmas, and tonight's christmas eve. ye see, boys, i kinder thought -- that is, i sorter had an idee, jest passin' like, you know -- that may be ye'd all like to come over to my house tonight and have a sort of tear round. but i suppose, now, you wouldn't? don't feel like it, may be?" he added with anxious sympathy, peering into the faces of his companions."well, i don't know," responded tom flynn with some cheerfulness. "p'r'aps we may. but how about your wife, old man? what does she say to it?"the old man hesitated. his conjugal experience had not been a happy one, and the fact was known to simpson's bar. his first wife, a delicate, pretty little woman, had suffered keenly and secretly from the jealous suspicions of her husband, until one day he invited the whole bar to his house to expose her infidelity. on arriving, the party found the shy, petite creature quietly engaged in her household duties, and retired abashed and discomfited. but the sensitive woman did not easily recover from the shock of this extraordinary outrage. it was with difficulty she regained her equanimity sufficiently to release her lover from the closet in which he was concealed and escape with him. she left a boy of three years to comfort her bereaved husband. the old man's present wife had been his cook. she was large, loyal, and aggressive.before he could reply, joe dimmick suggested with great directness that it was the "old man's house," and that, invoking the divine power, if the case were his own, he would invite whom he pleased, even if in so doing he imperilled his salvation. the powers of evil, he further remarked, should contend against him vainly. all this delivered with a terseness and vigor lost in this necessary translation."in course. certainly. thet's it," said the old man with a sympathetic frown. "thar's no trouble about thet. it's my own house, built every stick on it myself. don't you be afeard o' her, boys. she may cut up a trifle rough -- ez wimmin do -- but she'll come round." secretly the old man trusted to the exaltation of liquor and the power of courageous example to sustain him in such an emergency.as yet, dick bullen, the oracle and leader of simpson's bar, had not spoken. he now took his pipe from his lips. "old man, how's that yer johnny gettin' on? seems to me he didn't look so peart last time i seed him on the bluff heavin' rocks at chinamen. didn't seem to take much interest in it. thar was a gang of 'em by yar yesterday -- drownded out up the river -- and i kinder thought o' johnny, and how he'd miss 'em! may be now, we'd be in the way ef he wus sick?"the father, evidently touched not only by this pathetic picture of johnny's deprivation, but by the considerate delicacy of the speaker, hastened to assure him that johnny was better and that a "little fun might 'liven him up." whereupon dick arose, shook himself, and saying, "i'm ready. lead the way, old man: here goes," himself led the way with a leap, a characteristic howl, and darted out into the night. as he passed through the outer room he caught up a blazing brand from the hearth. the action was repeated by the rest of the party, closely following and elbowing each other, and before the astonished proprietor of thompson's grocery was aware of the intention of his guests, the room was deserted.the night was pitchy dark. in the first gust of wind their temporary torches were extinguished, and only the red brands dancing and flitting in the gloom like drunken will-o'-the-wisps indicated their whereabouts. their way led up pine-tree canyon, at the head of which a broad, low, bark-thatched cabin burrowed in the mountain-side. it was the home of the old man, and the entrance to the tunnel in which he worked when he worked at all. here the crowd paused for a moment, out of delicate deference to their host, who came up panting in the rear."p'r'aps ye'd better hold on a second out yer, whilst i go in and see thet things is all right," said the old man, with an indifference he was far from feeling. the suggestion was graciously accepted, the door opened and closed on the host, and the crowd, leaning their backs against the wall and cowering under the eaves, waited and listened.for a few moments there was no sound but the dripping of water from the eaves, and the stir and rustle of wrestling boughs above them. then the men became uneasy, and whispered suggestion and suspicion passed from the one to the other. "reckon she's caved in his head the first lick!" "decoyed him inter the tunnel and barred him up, likely." "got him down and sittin' on him." "prob'ly bilin suthin to heave on us: stand clear the door, boys!" for just then the latch clicked, the door slowly opened, and a voice said, "come in out o' the wet."the voice was neither that of the old man nor of his wife. it was the voice of a small boy, its weak treble broken by that preternatural hoarseness which only vagabondage and the habit of premature self-assertion can give. it was the face of a small boy that looked up at theirs -- a face that might have been pretty and even refined but that it was darkened by evil knowledge from within, and dirt and hard experience from without. he had a blanket around his shoulders and had evidently just risen from his bed. "come in," he repeated," and don't make no noise. the old man's in there talking to mar," he continued, pointing to an adjacent room which seemed to be a kitchen, from which the old man's voice came in deprecating accents. "let me be," he added, querulously, to dick bullen, who had caught him up, blanket and all, and was affecting to toss him into the fire, "let go o' me, you d----d old fool, d'ye hear?"thus adjured, dick bullen lowered johnny to the ground with a smothered laugh, while the men, entering quietly, ranged themselves around a long table of rough boards which occupied the centre of the room. johnny then gravely proceeded to a cupboard and brought out several articles which he deposited on the table. "thar's whiskey. and crackers. and red herons. and cheese." he took a bite of the latter on his way to the table. "and sugar." he scooped up a mouthful en route with a small and very dirty hand. "and terbacker. thar's dried appils too on the shelf, but i don't admire 'em. appils is swellin'. thar," he concluded, "now wade in, and don't be afeard. i don't mind the old woman. she don't b'long to me. s'long."he had stepped to the threshold of a small room, scarcely larger than a closet, partitioned off from the main apartment, and holding in its dim recess a small bed. he stood there a moment looking at the company, his bare feet peeping from the blanket, and nodded."hello, johnny! you ain't goin' to turn in agin, are ye?" said dick."yes, i are," responded johnny, decidedly."why, wot's up, old fellow?""i'm sick.""how sick!""i've got a fevier. and childblains. and roomatiz," returned johnny, and vanished within. after a moment's pause, he added in the dark, apparently from under the bedclothes, --"and biles!"there was an embarrassing silence. the men looked at each other, and at the fire. even with the appetizing banquet before them, it seemed as if they might again fall into the despondency of thompson's grocery, when the voice of the old man, incautiously lifted, came deprecatingly from the kitchen."certainly! thet's so. in course they is. a gang o' lazy drunken loafers, and that ar dick bullen's the ornariest of all. didn't hev no more sabe than to come round yar with sickness in the house and no provision. thet's what i said: 'bullen,' sez i, 'it's crazy drunk you are, or a fool,' sez i, 'to think o' such a thing.' 'staples,' i sez, 'be you a man, staples, and 'spect to raise h-ll under my roof and invalids lyin' round?' but they would come -- they would. thet's wot you must 'spect o' such trash as lays round the bar."a burst of laughter from the men followed this unfortunate exposure. whether it was overheard in the kitchen, or whether the old man's irate companion had just then exhausted all other modes of expressing her contemptuous indignation, i cannot say, but a back door was suddenly slammed with great violence. a moment later and the old man reappeared, haply unconscious of the cause of the late hilarious outburst, and smiled blandly."the old woman thought she'd jest run over to mrs. mcfadden's for a sociable call," he explained, with jaunty indifference, as he took a seat at the board.oddly enough it needed this untoward incident to relieve the embarrassment that was beginning to be felt by the party, and their natural audacity returned with their host. i do not propose to record the convivialities of that evening. the inquisitive reader will accept the statement that the conversation was characterized by the same intellectual exaltation, the same cautious reverence, the same fastidious delicacy, the same rhetorical precision, and the same logical and coherent discourse somewhat later in the evening, which distinguish similar gatherings of the masculine sex in more civilized localities and under more favorable auspices. no glasses were broken in the absence of any; no liquor was uselessly spilt on floor or table in the scarcity of that article.it was nearly midnight when the festivities were interrupted. "hush," said dick bullen, holding up his hand. it was the querulous voice of johnny from his adjacent closet: "o dad!"the old man arose hurriedly and disappeared in the closet. presently he reappeared. "his rheumatiz is coming on agin bad," he explained, "and he wants rubbin'." he lifted the demijohn of whiskey from the table and shook it. it was empty. dick bullen put down his tin cup with an embarrassed laugh. so did the others. the old man examined their contents and said hopefully, "i reckon that's enough; he don't need much. you hold on all o' you for a spell, and i'll be back"; and vanished in the closet with an old flannel shirt and the whiskey. the door closed but imperfectly, and the following dialogue was distinctly audible: --"now, sonny, whar does she ache worst?""sometimes over yar and sometimes under yer; but it's most powerful from yer to yer. rub yer, dad."a silence seemed to indicate a brisk rubbing. then johnny:"hevin' a good time out yer, dad?""yes, sonny.""tomorrer's chrismiss, ain't it?""yes, sonny. how does she feel now?""better rub a little furder down. wot's chrismiss, anyway? wot's it all about?""o, it's a day."this exhaustive definition was apparently satisfactory, for there was a silent interval of rubbing. presently johnny again:"mar sez that everywhere else but yer everybody gives things to everybody chrismiss, and then she jist waded inter you. she sez thar's a man they call sandy claws, not a white man, you know, but a kind o' chinemin, comes down the chimbley night afore chrismiss and gives things to chillern -- boys like me. puts 'em in their butes! thet's what she tried to play upon me. easy now, pop, whar are you rubbin' to -- thet's a mile from the place. she jest made that up, didn't she, jest to aggrewate me and you? don't rub thar . . . why, dad!"in the great quiet that seemed to have fallen upon the house the sigh of the near pines and the drip of leaves without was very distinct. johnny's voice, too, was lowered as he went on, "don't you take on now, fur i'm gettin' all right fast. wot's the boys doin' out thar?"the old man partly opened the door and peered through. his guests were sitting there sociably enough, and there were a few silver coins and a lean buckskin purse on the table. "bettin' on suthin -- some little game or 'nother. they're all right," he replied to johnny, and recommenced his rubbing."i'd like to take a hand and win some money," said johnny, reflectively, after a pause.the old man glibly repeated what was evidently a familiar formula, that if johnny would wait until he struck it rich in the tunnel he'd have lots of money, etc., etc."yes," said johnny, "but you don't. and whether you strike it or i win it, it's about the same. it's all luck. but it's mighty cur'o's about chrismiss -- ain't it? why do they call it chrismiss?"perhaps from some instinctive deference to the overhearing of his guests, or from some vague sense of incongruity, the old man's reply was so low as to be inaudible beyond the room."yes," said johnny, with some slight abatement of interest, "i've heerd o' him before. thar, that'll do, dad. i don't ache near so bad as i did. now wrap me tight in this yer blanket. so. now," he added in a muffled whisper, "sit down yer by me till i go asleep." to assure himself of obedience, he disengaged one hand from the blanket and, grasping his father's sleeve, again composed himself to rest.for some moments the old man waited patiently. then the unwonted stillness of the house excited his curiosity, and without moving from the bed, he cautiously opened the door with his disengaged hand, and looked into the main room. to his infinite surprise it was dark and deserted. but even then a smouldering log on the hearth broke, and by the upspringing blaze he saw the figure of dick bullen sitting by the dying embers."hello!"dick started, rose, and came somewhat unsteadily toward him."whar's the boys?" said the old man."gone up the canyon on a little pasear. they're coming back for me in a minit. i'm waitin' round for 'em. what are you starin' at, old man?" he added with a forced laugh; "do you think i'm drunk?"the old man might have been pardoned the supposition, for dick's eyes were humid and his face flushed. he loitered and lounged back to the chimney, yawned, shook himself, buttoned up his coat and laughed. "liquor ain't so plenty as that, old man. now don't you git up," he continued, as the old man made a movement to release his sleeve from johnny's hand. "don't you mind manners. sit jest whar you be; i'm goin' in a jiffy. thar, that's them now."there was a low tap at the door. dick bullen opened it quickly, nodded "good night" to his host, and disappeared. the old man would have followed him but for the hand that still unconsciously grasped his sleeve. he could have easily disengaged it: it was small, weak, and emaciated. but perhaps because it was small, weak, and emaciated, he changed his mind, and, drawing his chair closer to the bed, rested his head upon it. in this defenceless attitude the potency of his earlier potations surprised him. the room flickered and faded before his eyes, reappeared, faded again, went out, and left him -- asleep.meantime dick bullen, closing the door, confronted his companions. "are you ready?" said staples. "ready," said dick; "what's the time?" "past twelve," was the reply; "can you make it? -- it's nigh on fifty miles, the round trip hither and yon." "i reckon," returned dick, shortly. "whar's the mare?" "bill and jack's holdin' her at the crossin'." "let 'em hold on a minit longer," said dick.he turned and re-entered the house softly. by the light of the guttering candle and dying fire he saw that the door of the little room was open. he stepped toward it on tiptoe and looked in. the old man had fallen back in his chair, snoring, his helpless feet thrust out in a line with his collapsed shoulders, and his hat pulled over his eyes. beside him, on a narrow wooden bedstead, lay johnny, muffled tightly in a blanket that hid all save a strip of forehead and a few curls damp with perspiration. dick bullen made a step forward, hesitated, and glanced over his shoulder into the deserted room. everything was quiet. with a sudden resolution he parted his huge mustaches with both hands and stooped over the sleeping boy. but even as he did so a mischievous blast, lying in wait, swooped down the chimney, rekindled the hearth, and lit up the room with a shameless glow from which dick fled in bashful terror.his companions were already waiting for him at the crossing. two of them were struggling in the darkness with some strange misshapen bulk, which as dick came nearer took the semblance of a great yellow horse.it was the mare. she was not a pretty picture. from her roman nose to her rising haunches, from her arched spine hidden by the stiff machillas of a mexican saddle, to her thick, straight, bony legs, there was not a line of equine grace. in her half-blind but wholly vicious white eyes, in her protruding under lip, in her monstrous color, there was nothing but ugliness and vice."now then," said staples, "stand cl'ar of her heels, boys, and up with you. don't miss your first holt of her mane, and mind ye get your off stirrup quick. ready!"there was a leap, a scrambling struggle, a bound, a wild retreat of the crowd, a circle of flying hoofs, two springless leaps that jarred the earth, a rapid play and jingle of spurs, a plunge, and then the voice of dick somewhere in the darkness, "all right!""don't take the lower road back onless you're hard pushed for time! don't hold her in down hill! we'll be at the ford at five. g'lang! hoopa! mula! go!"a splash, a spark struck from the ledge in the road, a clatter in the rocky cut beyond, and dick was gone.sing, o muse, the ride of richard bullen! sing, o muse of chivalrous men! the sacred quest, the doughty deeds, the battery of low churls, the fearsome ride and grewsome perils of the flower of simpson's bar! alack! she is dainty, this muse! she will have none of this bucking brute and swaggering, ragged rider, and i must fain follow him in prose, afoot!it was one o'clock, and yet he had only gained rattlesnake hill. for in that time jovita had rehearsed to him all her imperfections and practised all her vices. thrice had she stumbled. twice had she thrown up her roman nose in a straight line with the reins, and, resisting bit and spur, struck out madly across country. twice had she reared, and, rearing, fallen backward; and twice had the agile dick, unharmed, regained his seat before she found her vicious legs again. and a mile beyond them, at the foot of a long hill, was rattlesnake creek. dick knew that here was the crucial test of his ability to perform his enterprise, set his teeth grimly, put his knees well into her flanks, and changed his defensive tactics to brisk aggression. bullied and maddened, jovita began the descent of the hill. here the artful richard pretended to hold her in with ostentatious objurgation and well- feigned cries of alarm. it is unnecessary to add that jovita instantly ran away. nor need i state the time made in the descent; it is written in the chronicles of simpson's bar. enough that in another moment, as it seemed to dick, she was splashing on the overflowed banks of rattlesnake creek. as dick expected, the momentum she had acquired carried her beyond the point of balking, and, holding her well together for a mighty leap, they dashed into the middle of the swiftly flowing current. a few moments of kicking, wading, and swimming, and dick drew a long breath on the opposite bank.the road from rattlesnake creek to red mountain was tolerably level. either the plunge in rattlesnake creek had dampened her baleful fire, or the art which led to it had shown her the superior wickedness of her rider, for jovita no longer wasted her surplus energy in wanton conceits. once she bucked, but it was from force of habit; once she shied, but it was from a new freshly painted meeting- house at the crossing of the county road. hollows, ditches, gravelly deposits, patches of freshly springing grasses, flew from beneath her rattling hoofs. she began to smell unpleasantly, once or twice she coughed slightly, but there was no abatement of her strength or speed. by two o'clock he had passed red mountain and begun the descent to the plain. ten minutes later the driver of the fast pioneer coach was overtaken and passed by a "man on a pinto hoss," -- an event sufficiently notable for remark. at half past two dick rose in his stirrups with a great shout. stars were glittering through the rifted clouds, and beyond him, out of the plain, rose two spires, a flagstaff, and a straggling line of black objects. dick jingled his spurs and swung his riata, jovita bounded forward, and in another moment they swept into tuttleville and drew up before the wooden piazza of "the hotel of all nations."what transpired that night at tuttleville is not strictly a part of this record. briefly i may state, however, that after jovita had been handed over to a sleepy ostler, whom she at once kicked into unpleasant consciousness, dick sallied out with the bar-keeper for a tour of the sleeping town. lights still gleamed from a few saloons and gambling-houses; but, avoiding these, they stopped before several closed shops, and by persistent tapping and judicious outcry roused the proprietors from their beds, and made them unbar the doors of their magazines and expose their wares. sometimes they were met by curses, but oftener by interest and some concern in their needs, and the interview was invariably concluded by a drink. it was three o'clock before this pleasantry was given over, and with a small waterproof bag of india-rubber strapped on his shoulders dick returned to the hotel. but here he was waylaid by beauty -- beauty opulent in charms, affluent in dress, persuasive in speech, and spanish in accent! in vain she repeated the invitation in "excelsior," happily scorned by all alpine- climbing youth, and rejected by this child of the sierras -- a rejection softened in this instance by a laugh and his last gold coin. and then he sprang to the saddle and dashed down the lonely street and out into the lonelier plain, where presently the lights, the black line of houses, the spires, and the flagstaff sank into the earth behind him again and were lost in the distance.the storm had cleared away, the air was brisk and cold, the outlines of adjacent landmarks were distinct, but it was half past four before dick reached the meeting-house and the crossing of the county road. to avoid the rising grade he had taken a longer and more circuitous road, in whose viscid mud jovita sank fetlock deep at every bound. it was a poor preparation for a steady ascent of five miles more; but jovita, gathering her legs under her, took it with her usual blind, unreasoning fury, and a half-hour later reached the long level that led to rattlesnake creek. another half-hour would bring him to the creek. he threw the reins lightly upon the neck of the mare, chirruped to her, and began to sing.suddenly jovita shied with a bound that would have unseated a less practised rider. hanging to her rein was a figure that had leaped from the bank, and at the same time from the road before her arose a shadowy horse and rider. "throw up your hands," commanded this second apparition, with an oath.dick felt the mare tremble, quiver, and apparently sink under him. he knew what it meant and was prepared."stand aside, jack simpson, i know you, you d----d thief. let me pass or --"he did not finish the sentence. jovita rose straight in the air with a terrific bound, throwing the figure from her bit with a single shake of her vicious head, and charged with deadly malevolence down on the impediment before her. an oath, a pistol- shot, horse and highwayman rolled over in the road, and the next moment jovita was a hundred yards away. but the good right arm of her rider, shattered by a bullet, dropped helplessly at his side.without slacking his speed he shifted the reins to his left hand. but a few moments later he was obliged to halt and tighten the saddle-girths that had slipped in the onset. this in his crippled condition took some time. he had no fear of pursuit, but looking up he saw that the eastern stars were already paling, and that the distant peaks had lost their ghostly whiteness, and now stood out blackly against a lighter sky. day was upon him. then completely absorbed in a single idea, he forgot the pain of his wound, and mounting again dashed on toward rattlesnake creek. but now jovita's breath came broken by gasps, dick reeled in his saddle, and brighter and brighter grew the sky.ride, richard; run, jovita; linger, o day!for the last few rods there was a roaring in his ears. was it exhaustion from loss of blood, or what? he was dazed and giddy as he swept down the hill, and did not recognize his surroundings. had he taken the wrong road, or was this rattlesnake creek?it was. but the brawling creek he had swam a few hours before had risen, more than doubled its volume, and now rolled a swift and resistless river between him and rattlesnake hill. for the first time that night richard's heart sank within him. the river, the mountain, the quickening east, swam before his eyes. he shut them to recover his self-control. in that brief interval, by some fantastic mental process, the little room at simpson's bar and the figures of the sleeping father and son rose upon him. he opened his eyes wildly, cast off his coat, pistol, boots, and saddle, bound his precious pack tightly to his shoulders, grasped the bare flanks of jovita with his bared knees, and with a shout dashed into the yellow water. a cry rose from the opposite bank as the head of a man and horse struggled for a few moments against the battling current, and then were swept away amidst uprooted trees and whirling drift-wood.*the old man started and woke. the fire on the hearth was dead, the candle in the outer room flickering in its socket, and somebody was rapping at the door. he opened it, but fell back with a cry before the dripping half-naked figure that reeled against the doorpost."dick?""hush! is he awake yet?""no -- but, dick? --""dry up, you old fool! get me some whiskey quick!" the old man flew and returned with -- an empty bottle! dick would have sworn, but his strength was not equal to the occasion. he staggered, caught at the handle of the door, and motioned to the old man."thar's suthin' in my pack yer for johnny. take it off. i can't."the old man unstrapped the pack and laid it before the exhausted man."open it, quick!"he did so with trembling fingers. it contained only a few poor toys -- cheap and barbaric enough, goodness knows, but bright with paint and tinsel. one of them was broken; another, i fear, was irretrievably ruined by water; and on the third -- ah me! there was a cruel spot."it don't look like much, that's a fact," said dick, ruefully . . . "but it's the best we could do . . . take 'em, old man, and put 'em in his stocking, and tell him -- tell him, you know -- hold me, old man --" the old man caught at his sinking figure. "tell him," said dick, with a weak little laugh -- "tell him sandy claus has come."and even so, bedraggled, ragged, unshaven and unshorn, with one arm hanging helplessly at his side, santa claus came to simpson's bar and fell fainting on the first threshold. the christmas dawn came slowly after, touching the remoter peaks with the rosy warmth of ineffable love. and it looked so tenderly on simpson's bar that the whole mountain as if caught in a generous action, blushed to the skies.there was commotion in roaring camp. it could not have been a fight, for in 1850 that was not novel enough to have called together the entire settlement. the ditches and claims were not only deserted, but "tuttle's grocery" had contributed its gamblers, who, it will be remembered, calmly continued their game the day that french pete and kanaka joe shot each other to death over the bar in the front room. the whole camp was collected before a rude cabin on the outer edge of the clearing. conversation was carried on in a low tone, but the name of a woman was frequently repeated. it was a name familiar enough in the camp,--"cherokee sal."perhaps the less said of her the better. she was a coarse and, it is to be feared, a very sinful woman. but at that time she was the only woman in roaring camp, and was just then lying in sore extremity, when she most needed the ministration of her own sex. dissolute, abandoned, and irreclaimable, she was yet suffering a martyrdom hard enough to bear even when veiled by sympathizing womanhood, but now terrible in her loneliness. the primal curse had come to her in that original isolation which must have made the punishment of the first transgression so dreadful. it was, perhaps, part of the expiation of her sin that, at a moment when she most lacked her sex's intuitive tenderness and care, she met only the half-contemptuous faces of her masculine associates. yet a few of the spectators were, i think, touched by her sufferings. sandy tipton thought it was "rough on sal," and, in the contemplation of her condition, for a moment rose superior to the fact that he had an ace and two bowers in his sleeve.it will be seen also that the situation was novel. deaths were by no means uncommon in roaring camp, but a birth was a new thing. people had been dismissed the camp effectively, finally, and with no possibility of return; but this was the first time that anybody had been introduced ab initio. hence the excitement."you go in there, stumpy," said a prominent citizen known as "kentuck," addressing one of the loungers. "go in there, and see what you kin do. you've had experience in them things."perhaps there was a fitness in the selection. stumpy, in other climes, had been the putative head of two families; in fact, it was owing to some legal informality in these proceedings that roaring camp--a city of refuge--was indebted to his company. the crowd approved the choice, and stumpy was wise enough to bow to the majority. the door closed on the extempore surgeon and midwife, and roaring camp sat down outside, smoked its pipe, and awaited the issue.the assemblage numbered about a hundred men. one or two of these were actual fugitives from justice, some were criminal, and all were reckless. physically they exhibited no indication of their past lives and character. the greatest scamp had a raphael face, with a profusion of blonde hair; oakhurst, a gambler, had the melancholy air and intellectual abstraction of a hamlet; the coolest and most courageous man was scarcely over five feet in height, with a soft voice and an embarrassed, timid manner. the term "roughs" applied to them was a distinction rather than a definition. perhaps in the minor details of fingers, toes, ears, etc., the camp may have been deficient, but these slight omissions did not detract from their aggregate force. the strongest man had but three fingers on his right hand; the best shot had but one eye.such was the physical aspect of the men that were dispersed around the cabin. the camp lay in a triangular valley between two hills and a river. the only outlet was a steep trail over the summit of a hill that faced the cabin, now illuminated by the rising moon. the suffering woman might have seen it from the rude bunk whereon she lay,--seen it winding like a silver thread until it was lost in the stars above.a fire of withered pine boughs added sociability to the gathering. by degrees the natural levity of roaring camp returned. bets were freely offered and taken regarding the result. three to five that "sal would get through with it;" even that the child would survive; side bets as to the sex and complexion of the coming stranger. in the midst of an excited discussion an exclamation came from those nearest the door, and the camp stopped to listen. above the swaying and moaning of the pines, the swift rush of the river, and the crackling of the fire rose a sharp, querulous cry,--a cry unlike anything heard before in the camp. the pines stopped moaning, the river ceased to rush, and the fire to crackle. it seemed as if nature had stopped to listen too.the camp rose to its feet as one man! it was proposed to explode a barrel of gunpowder; but in consideration of the situation of the mother, better counsels prevailed, and only a few revolvers were discharged; for whether owing to the rude surgery of the camp, or some other reason, cherokee sal was sinking fast. within an hour she had climbed, as it were, that rugged road that led to the stars, and so passed out of roaring camp, its sin and shame, forever. i do not think that the announcement disturbed them much, except in speculation as to the fate of the child. "can he live now?" was asked of stumpy. the answer was doubtful. the only other being of cherokee sal's sex and maternal condition in the settlement was an ass. there was some conjecture as to fitness, but the experiment was tried. it was less problematical than the ancient treatment of romulus and remus, and apparently as successful.when these details were completed, which exhausted another hour, the door was opened, and the anxious crowd of men, who had already formed themselves into a queue, entered in single file. beside the low bunk or shelf, on which the figure of the mother was starkly outlined below the blankets, stood a pine table. on this a candle- box was placed, and within it, swathed in staring red flannel, lay the last arrival at roaring camp. beside the candle-box was placed a hat. its use was soon indicated. "gentlemen," said stumpy, with a singular mixture of authority and ex officio complacency,-- "gentlemen will please pass in at the front door, round the table, and out at the back door. them as wishes to contribute anything toward the orphan will find a hat handy." the first man entered with his hat on; he uncovered, however, as he looked about him, and so unconsciously set an example to the next. in such communities good and bad actions are catching. as the procession filed in comments were audible,--criticisms addressed perhaps rather to stumpy in the character of showman; "is that him?" "mighty small specimen;" "has n't more 'n got the color;" "ain't bigger nor a derringer." the contributions were as characteristic: a silver tobacco box; a doubloon; a navy revolver, silver mounted; a gold specimen; a very beautifully embroidered lady's handkerchief (from oakhurst the gambler); a diamond breastpin; a diamond ring (suggested by the pin, with the remark from the giver that he "saw that pin and went two diamonds better"); a slung-shot; a bible (contributor not detected); a golden spur; a silver teaspoon (the initials, i regret to say, were not the giver's); a pair of surgeon's shears; a lancet; a bank of england note for 5 pounds; and about $200 in loose gold and silver coin. during these proceedings stumpy maintained a silence as impassive as the dead on his left, a gravity as inscrutable as that of the newly born on his right. only one incident occurred to break the monotony of the curious procession. as kentuck bent over the candle-box half curiously, the child turned, and, in a spasm of pain, caught at his groping finger, and held it fast for a moment. kentuck looked foolish and embarrassed. something like a blush tried to assert itself in his weather-beaten cheek. "the damned little cuss!" he said, as he extricated his finger, with perhaps more tenderness and care than he might have been deemed capable of showing. he held that finger a little apart from its fellows as he went out, and examined it curiously. the examination provoked the same original remark in regard to the child. in fact, he seemed to enjoy repeating it. "he rastled with my finger," he remarked to tipton, holding up the member, "the damned little cuss!"it was four o'clock before the camp sought repose. a light burnt in the cabin where the watchers sat, for stumpy did not go to bed that night. nor did kentuck. he drank quite freely, and related with great gusto his experience, invariably ending with his characteristic condemnation of the newcomer. it seemed to relieve him of any unjust implication of sentiment, and kentuck had the weaknesses of the nobler sex. when everybody else had gone to bed, he walked down to the river and whistled reflectingly. then he walked up the gulch past the cabin, still whistling with demonstrative unconcern. at a large redwood-tree he paused and retraced his steps, and again passed the cabin. halfway down to the river's bank he again paused, and then returned and knocked at the door. it was opened by stumpy. "how goes it?" said kentuck, looking past stumpy toward the candle-box. "all serene!" replied stumpy. "anything up?" "nothing." there was a pause--an embarrassing one--stumpy still holding the door. then kentuck had recourse to his finger, which he held up to stumpy. "rastled with it,--the damned little cuss," he said, and retired.the next day cherokee sal had such rude sepulture as roaring camp afforded. after her body had been committed to the hillside, there was a formal meeting of the camp to discuss what should be done with her infant. a resolution to adopt it was unanimous and enthusiastic. but an animated discussion in regard to the manner and feasibility of providing for its wants at once sprang up. it was remarkable that the argument partook of none of those fierce personalities with which discussions were usually conducted at roaring camp. tipton proposed that they should send the child to red dog,--a distance of forty miles,--where female attention could be procured. but the unlucky suggestion met with fierce and unanimous opposition. it was evident that no plan which entailed parting from their new acquisition would for a moment be entertained. "besides," said tom ryder, "them fellows at red dog would swap it, and ring in somebody else on us." a disbelief in the honesty of other camps prevailed at roaring camp, as in other places.the introduction of a female nurse in the camp also met with objection. it was argued that no decent woman could be prevailed to accept roaring camp as her home, and the speaker urged that "they didn't want any more of the other kind." this unkind allusion to the defunct mother, harsh as it may seem, was the first spasm of propriety,--the first symptom of the camp's regeneration. stumpy advanced nothing. perhaps he felt a certain delicacy in interfering with the selection of a possible successor in office. but when questioned, he averred stoutly that he and "jinny"--the mammal before alluded to--could manage to rear the child. there was something original, independent, and heroic about the plan that pleased the camp. stumpy was retained. certain articles were sent for to sacramento. "mind," said the treasurer, as he pressed a bag of gold-dust into the expressman's hand, "the best that can be got,--lace, you know, and filigree-work and frills,--damn the cost!"strange to say, the child thrived. perhaps the invigorating climate of the mountain camp was compensation for material deficiencies. nature took the foundling to her broader breast. in that rare atmosphere of the sierra foothills,--that air pungent with balsamic odor, that ethereal cordial at once bracing and exhilarating,--he may have found food and nourishment, or a subtle chemistry that transmuted ass's milk to lime and phosphorus. stumpy inclined to the belief that it was the latter and good nursing. "me and that ass," he would say, "has been father and mother to him! don't you," he would add, apostrophizing the helpless bundle before him, "never go back on us."by the time he was a month old the necessity of giving him a name became apparent. he had generally been known as "the kid," "stumpy's boy," "the coyote" (an allusion to his vocal powers), and even by kentuck's endearing diminutive of "the damned little cuss." but these were felt to be vague and unsatisfactory, and were at last dismissed under another influence. gamblers and adventurers are generally superstitious, and oakhurst one day declared that the baby had brought "the luck" to roaring camp. it was certain that of late they had been successful. "luck" was the name agreed upon, with the prefix of tommy for greater convenience. no allusion was made to the mother, and the father was unknown. "it's better," said the philosophical oakhurst, "to take a fresh deal all round. call him luck, and start him fair." a day was accordingly set apart for the christening. what was meant by this ceremony the reader may imagine who has already gathered some idea of the reckless irreverence of roaring camp. the master of ceremonies was one "boston," a noted wag, and the occasion seemed to promise the greatest facetiousness. this ingenious satirist had spent two days in preparing a burlesque of the church service, with pointed local allusions. the choir was properly trained, and sandy tipton was to stand godfather. but after the procession had marched to the grove with music and banners, and the child had been deposited before a mock altar, stumpy stepped before the expectant crowd. "it ain't my style to spoil fun, boys," said the little man, stoutly eyeing the faces around him," but it strikes me that this thing ain't exactly on the squar. it's playing it pretty low down on this yer baby to ring in fun on him that he ain't goin' to understand. and ef there's goin' to be any godfathers round, i'd like to see who's got any better rights than me." a silence followed stumpy's speech. to the credit of all humorists be it said that the first man to acknowledge its justice was the satirist thus stopped of his fun. "but," said stumpy, quickly following up his advantage, "we're here for a christening, and we'll have it. i proclaim you thomas luck, according to the laws of the united states and the state of california, so help me god." it was the first time that the name of the deity had been otherwise uttered than profanely in the camp. the form of christening was perhaps even more ludicrous than the satirist had conceived; but strangely enough, nobody saw it and nobody laughed. "tommy" was christened as seriously as he would have been under a christian roof and cried and was comforted in as orthodox fashion.and so the work of regeneration began in roaring camp. almost imperceptibly a change came over the settlement. the cabin assigned to "tommy luck"--or "the luck," as he was more frequently called--first showed signs of improvement. it was kept scrupulously clean and whitewashed. then it was boarded, clothed, and papered. the rose wood cradle, packed eighty miles by mule, had, in stumpy's way of putting it, "sorter killed the rest of the furniture." so the rehabilitation of the cabin became a necessity. the men who were in the habit of lounging in at stumpy's to see "how 'the luck' got on" seemed to appreciate the change, and in self-defense the rival establishment of "tuttle's grocery" bestirred itself and imported a carpet and mirrors. the reflections of the latter on the appearance of roaring camp tended to produce stricter habits of personal cleanliness. again stumpy imposed a kind of quarantine upon those who aspired to the honor and privilege of holding the luck. it was a cruel mortification to kentuck--who, in the carelessness of a large nature and the habits of frontier life, had begun to regard all garments as a second cuticle, which, like a snake's, only sloughed off through decay--to be debarred this privilege from certain prudential reasons. yet such was the subtle influence of innovation that he thereafter appeared regularly every afternoon in a clean shirt and face still shining from his ablutions. nor were moral and social sanitary laws neglected. "tommy," who was supposed to spend his whole existence in a persistent attempt to repose, must not be disturbed by noise. the shouting and yelling, which had gained the camp its infelicitous title, were not permitted within hearing distance of stumpy's. the men conversed in whispers or smoked with indian gravity. profanity was tacitly given up in these sacred precincts, and throughout the camp a popular form of expletive, known as "d--n the luck!" and "curse the luck!" was abandoned, as having a new personal bearing. vocal music was not interdicted, being supposed to have a soothing, tranquilizing quality; and one song, sung by "man-o'-war jack," an english sailor from her majesty's australian colonies, was quite popular as a lullaby. it was a lugubrious recital of the exploits of "the arethusa, seventy-four," in a muffled minor, ending with a prolonged dying fall at the burden of each verse, "on b-oo-o-ard of the arethusa." it was a fine sight to see jack holding the luck, rocking from side to side as if with the motion of a ship, and crooning forth this naval ditty. either through the peculiar rocking of jack or the length of his song,--it contained ninety stanzas, and was continued with conscientious deliberation to the bitter end,--the lullaby generally had the desired effect. at such times the men would lie at full length under the trees in the soft summer twilight, smoking their pipes and drinking in the melodious utterances. an indistinct idea that this was pastoral happiness pervaded the camp. "this 'ere kind o' think," said the cockney simmons, meditatively reclining on his elbow, "is 'evingly." it reminded him of greenwich.on the long summer days the luck was usually carried to the gulch from whence the golden store of roaring camp was taken. there, on a blanket spread over pine boughs, he would lie while the men were working in the ditches below. latterly there was a rude attempt to decorate this bower with flowers and sweet-smelling shrubs, and generally some one would bring him a cluster of wild honeysuckles, azaleas, or the painted blossoms of las mariposas. the men had suddenly awakened to the fact that there were beauty and significance in these trifles, which they had so long trodden carelessly beneath their feet. a flake of glittering mica, a fragment of variegated quartz, a bright pebble from the bed of the creek, became beautiful to eyes thus cleared and strengthened, and were invariably pat aside for the luck. it was wonderful how many treasures the woods and hillsides yielded that "would do for tommy." surrounded by playthings such as never child out of fairyland had before, it is to he hoped that tommy was content. he appeared to be serenely happy, albeit there was an infantine gravity about him, a contemplative light in his round gray eyes, that sometimes worried stumpy. he was always tractable and quiet, and it is recorded that once, having crept beyond his "corral,"--a hedge of tessellated pine boughs, which surrounded his bed,--he dropped over the bank on his head in the soft earth, and remained with his mottled legs in the air in that position for at least five minutes with unflinching gravity. he was extricated without a murmur. i hesitate to record the many other instances of his sagacity, which rest, unfortunately, upon the statements of prejudiced friends. some of them were not without a tinge of superstition. "i crep' up the bank just now," said kentuck one day, in a breathless state of excitement "and dern my skin if he was a-talking to a jay bird as was a-sittin' on his lap. there they was, just as free and sociable as anything you please, a- jawin' at each other just like two cherrybums." howbeit, whether creeping over the pine boughs or lying lazily on his back blinking at the leaves above him, to him the birds sang, the squirrels chattered, and the flowers bloomed. nature was his nurse and playfellow. for him she would let slip between the leaves golden shafts of sunlight that fell just within his grasp; she would send wandering breezes to visit him with the balm of bay and resinous gum; to him the tall redwoods nodded familiarly and sleepily, the bumblebees buzzed, and the rooks cawed a slumbrous accompaniment.such was the golden summer of roaring camp. they were "flush times," and the luck was with them. the claims had yielded enormously. the camp was jealous of its privileges and looked suspiciously on strangers. no encouragement was given to immigration, and, to make their seclusion more perfect, the land on either side of the mountain wall that surrounded the camp they duly preempted. this, and a reputation for singular proficiency with the revolver, kept the reserve of roaring camp inviolate. the expressman--their only connecting link with the surrounding world-- sometimes told wonderful stories of the camp. he would say, "they've a street up there in 'roaring' that would lay over any street in red dog. they've got vines and flowers round their houses, and they wash themselves twice a day. but they're mighty rough on strangers, and they worship an ingin baby."with the prosperity of the camp came a desire for further improvement. it was proposed to build a hotel in the following spring, and to invite one or two decent families to reside there for the sake of the luck, who might perhaps profit by female companionship. the sacrifice that this concession to the sex cost these men, who were fiercely skeptical in regard to its general virtue and usefulness, can only be accounted for by their affection for tommy. a few still held out. but the resolve could not be carried into effect for three months, and the minority meekly yielded in the hope that something might turn up to prevent it. and it did.the winter of 1851 will long be remembered in the foothills. the snow lay deep on the sierras, and every mountain creek became a river, and every river a lake. each gorge and gulch was transformed into a tumultuous watercourse that descended the hillsides, tearing down giant trees and scattering its drift and debris along the plain. red dog had been twice under water, and roaring camp had been forewarned. "water put the gold into them gulches," said stumpy. "it been here once and will be here again!" and that night the north fork suddenly leaped over its banks and swept up the triangular valley of roaring camp.in the confusion of rushing water, crashing trees, and crackling timber, and the darkness which seemed to flow with the water and blot out the fair valley, but little could be done to collect the scattered camp. when the morning broke, the cabin of stumpy, nearest the river-bank, was gone. higher up the gulch they found the body of its unlucky owner; but the pride, the hope, the joy, the luck, of roaring camp had disappeared. they were returning with sad hearts when a shout from the bank recalled them.it was a relief-boat from down the river. they had picked up, they said, a man and an infant, nearly exhausted, about two miles below. did anybody know them, and did they belong here?it needed but a glance to show them kentuck lying there, cruelly crushed and bruised, but still holding the luck of roaring camp in his arms. as they bent over the strangely assorted pair, they saw that the child was cold and pulseless. "he is dead," said one. kentuck opened his eyes. "dead?" he repeated feebly. "yes, my man, and you are dying too." a smile lit the eyes of the expiring kentuck. "dying!" he repeated; "he's a-taking me with him. tell the boys i've got the luck with me now;" and the strong man, clinging to the frail babe as a drowning man is said to cling to a straw, drifted away into the shadowy river that flows forever to the unknown sea.i do not think that we ever knew his real name. our ignorance of it certainly never gave us any social inconvenience, for at sandy bar in 1854 most men were christened anew. sometimes these appellatives were derived from some distinctiveness of dress, as in the case of "dungaree jack"; or from some peculiarity of habit, as shown in "saleratus bill," so called from an undue proportion of that chemical in his daily bread; or for some unlucky slip, as exhibited in "the iron pirate," a mild, inoffensive man, who earned that baleful title by his unfortunate mispronunciation of the term "iron pyrites." perhaps this may have been the beginning of a rude heraldry; but i am constrained to think that it was because a man's real name in that day rested solely upon his own unsupported statement. "call yourself clifford, do you?" said boston, addressing a timid newcomer with infinite scorn; "hell is full of such cliffords!" he then introduced the unfortunate man, whose name happened to be really clifford, as "jay-bird charley"--an unhallowed inspiration of the moment that clung to him ever after.but to return to tennessee's partner, whom we never knew by any other than this relative title; that he had ever existed as a separate and distinct individuality we only learned later. it seems that in 1853 he left poker flat to go to san francisco, ostensibly to procure a wife. he never got any farther than stockton. at that place he was attracted by a young person who waited upon the table at the hotel where he took his meals. one morning he said something to her which caused her to smile not unkindly, to somewhat coquettishly break a plate of toast over his upturned, serious, simple face, and to retreat to the kitchen. he followed her, and emerged a few moments later, covered with more toast and victory. that day week they were married by a justice of the peace, and returned to poker flat. i am aware that something more might be made of this episode, but i prefer to tell it as it was current at sandy bar--in the gulches and barrooms--where all sentiment was modified by a strong sense of humor.of their married felicity but little is known, perhaps for the reason that tennessee, then living with his partner, one day took occasion to say something to the bride on his own account, at which, it is said, she smiled not unkindly and chastely retreated-- this time as far as marysville, where tennessee followed her, and where they went to housekeeping without the aid of a justice of the peace. tennessee's partner took the loss of his wife simply and seriously, as was his fashion. but to everybody's surprise, when tennessee one day returned from marysville, without his partner's wife--she having smiled and retreated with somebody else-- tennessee's partner was the first man to shake his hand and greet him with affection. the boys who had gathered in the canyon to see the shooting were naturally indignant. their indignation might have found vent in sarcasm but for a certain look in tennessee's partner's eye that indicated a lack of humorous appreciation. in fact, he was a grave man, with a steady application to practical detail which was unpleasant in a difficulty.meanwhile a popular feeling against tennessee had grown up on the bar. he was known to be a gambler; he was suspected to be a thief. in these suspicions tennessee's partner was equally compromised; his continued intimacy with tennessee after the affair above quoted could only be accounted for on the hypothesis of a copartnership of crime. at last tennessee's guilt became flagrant. one day he overtook a stranger on his way to red dog. the stranger afterward related that tennessee beguiled the time with interesting anecdote and reminiscence, but illogically concluded the interview in the following words: "and now, young man, i'll trouble you for your knife, your pistols, and your money. you see your weppings might get you into trouble at red dog, and your money's a temptation to the evilly disposed. i think you said your address was san francisco. i shall endeavor to call." it may be stated here that tennessee had a fine flow of humor, which no business preoccupation could wholly subdue.this exploit was his last. red dog and sandy bar made common cause against the highwayman. tennessee was hunted in very much the same fashion as his prototype, the grizzly. as the toils closed around him, he made a desperate dash through the bar, emptying his revolver at the crowd before the arcade saloon, and so on up grizzly canyon; but at its farther extremity he was stopped by a small man on a gray horse. the men looked at each other a moment in silence. both were fearless, both self-possessed and independent; and both types of a civilization that in the seventeenth century would have been called heroic, but, in the nineteenth, simply "reckless." "what have you got there?--i call," said tennessee, quietly. "two bowers and an ace," said the stranger, as quietly, showing two revolvers and a bowie knife. "that takes me," returned tennessee; and with this gamblers' epigram, he threw away his useless pistol, and rode back with his captor.it was a warm night. the cool breeze which usually sprang up with the going down of the sun behind the chaparral-crested mountain was that evening withheld from sandy bar. the little canyon was stifling with heated resinous odors, and the decaying driftwood on the bar sent forth faint, sickening exhalations. the feverishness of day, and its fierce passions, still filled the camp. lights moved restlessly along the bank of the river, striking no answering reflection from its tawny current. against the blackness of the pines the windows of the old loft above the express office stood out staringly bright; and through their curtainless panes the loungers below could see the forms of those who were even then deciding the fate of tennessee. and above all this, etched on the dark firmament, rose the sierra, remote and passionless, crowned with remoter passionless stars.the trial of tennessee was conducted as fairly as was consistent with a judge and jury who felt themselves to some extent obliged to justify, in their verdict, the previous irregularities of arrest and indictment. the law of sandy bar was implacable, but not vengeful. the excitement and personal feeling of the chase were over; with tennessee safe in their hands they were ready to listen patiently to any defense, which they were already satisfied was insufficient. there being no doubt in their own minds, they were willing to give the prisoner the benefit of any that might exist. secure in the hypothesis that he ought to be hanged, on general principles, they indulged him with more latitude of defense than his reckless hardihood seemed to ask. the judge appeared to be more anxious than the prisoner, who, otherwise unconcerned, evidently took a grim pleasure in the responsibility he had created. "i don't take any hand in this yer game," had been his invariable but good-humored reply to all questions. the judge--who was also his captor--for a moment vaguely regretted that he had not shot him "on sight" that morning, but presently dismissed this human weakness as unworthy of the judicial mind. nevertheless, when there was a tap at the door, and it was said that tennessee's partner was there on behalf of the prisoner, he was admitted at once without question. perhaps the younger members of the jury, to whom the proceedings were becoming irksomely thoughtful, hailed him as a relief.for he was not, certainly, an imposing figure. short and stout, with a square face sunburned into a preternatural redness, clad in a loose duck "jumper" and trousers streaked and splashed with red soil, his aspect under any circumstances would have been quaint, and was now even ridiculous. as he stooped to deposit at his feet a heavy carpetbag he was carrying, it became obvious, from partially developed legends and inscriptions, that the material with which his trousers had been patched had been originally intended for a less ambitious covering. yet he advanced with great gravity, and after having shaken the hand of each person in the room with labored cordiality, he wiped his serious, perplexed face on a red bandanna handkerchief, a shade lighter than his complexion, laid his powerful hand upon the table to steady himself, and thus addressed the judge:"i was passin' by," he began, by way of apology, "and i thought i'd just step in and see how things was gittin' on with tennessee thar-- my pardner. it's a hot night. i disremember any sich weather before on the bar."he paused a moment, but nobody volunteering any other meteorological recollection, he again had recourse to his pocket handkerchief, and for some moments mopped his face diligently."have you anything to say in behalf of the prisoner?" said the judge, finally."thet's it," said tennessee's partner, in a tone of relief. "i come yar as tennessee's pardner--knowing him nigh on four year, off and on, wet and dry, in luck and out o' luck. his ways ain't allers my ways, but thar ain't any p'ints in that young man, thar ain't any liveliness as he's been up to, as i don't know. and you sez to me, sez you--confidential-like, and between man and man--sez you, 'do you know anything in his behalf?' and i sez to you, sez i-- confidential-like, as between man and man--'what should a man know of his pardner?'""is this all you have to say?" asked the judge impatiently, feeling, perhaps, that a dangerous sympathy of humor was beginning to humanize the court."thet's so," continued tennessee's partner. "it ain't for me to say anything agin' him. and now, what's the case? here's tennessee wants money, wants it bad, and doesn't like to ask it of his old pardner. well, what does tennessee do? he lays for a stranger, and he fetches that stranger. and you lays for him, and you fetches him; and the honors is easy. and i put it to you, bein' a far-minded man, and to you, gentlemen, all, as far-minded men, ef this isn't so.""prisoner," said the judge, interrupting, "have you any questions to ask this man?""no! no!" continued tennessee's partner, hastily. "i play this yer hand alone. to come down to the bedrock, it's just this: tennessee, thar, has played it pretty rough and expensive-like on a stranger, and on this yer camp. and now, what's the fair thing? some would say more; some would say less. here's seventeen hundred dollars in coarse gold and a watch--it's about all my pile--and call it square!" and before a hand could be raised to prevent him, he had emptied the contents of the carpetbag upon the table.for a moment his life was in jeopardy. one or two men sprang to their feet, several hands groped for hidden weapons, and a suggestion to "throw him from the window" was only overridden by a gesture from the judge. tennessee laughed. and apparently oblivious of the excitement, tennessee's partner improved the opportunity to mop his face again with his handkerchief.when order was restored, and the man was made to understand, by the use of forcible figures and rhetoric, that tennessee's offense could not be condoned by money, his face took a more serious and sanguinary hue, and those who were nearest to him noticed that his rough hand trembled slightly on the table. he hesitated a moment as he slowly returned the gold to the carpetbag, as if he had not yet entirely caught the elevated sense of justice which swayed the tribunal, and was perplexed with the belief that he had not offered enough. then he turned to the judge, and saying, "this yer is a lone hand, played alone, and without my pardner," he bowed to the jury and was about to withdraw when the judge called him back. "if you have anything to say to tennessee, you had better say it now." for the first time that evening the eyes of the prisoner and his strange advocate met. tennessee smiled, showed his white teeth, and, saying, "euchred, old man!" held out his hand. tennessee's partner took it in his own, and saying, "i just dropped in as i was passin' to see how things was getting' on," let the hand passively fall, and adding that it was a warm night, again mopped his face with his handkerchief, and without another word withdrew.the two men never again met each other alive. for the unparalleled insult of a bribe offered to judge lynch--who, whether bigoted, weak, or narrow, was at least incorruptible--firmly fixed in the mind of that mythical personage any wavering determination of tennessee's fate; and at the break of day he was marched, closely guarded, to meet it at the top of marley's hill.how he met it, how cool he was, how he refused to say anything, how perfect were the arrangements of the committee, were all duly reported, with the addition of a warning moral and example to all future evildoers, in the red dog clarion, by its editor, who was present, and to whose vigorous english i cheerfully refer the reader. but the beauty of that midsummer morning, the blessed amity of earth and air and sky, the awakened life of the free woods and hills, the joyous renewal and promise of nature, and above all, the infinite serenity that thrilled through each, was not reported, as not being a part of the social lesson. and yet, when the weak and foolish deed was done, and a life, with its possibilities and responsibilities, had passed out of the misshapen thing that dangled between earth and sky, the birds sang, the flowers bloomed, the sun shone, as cheerily as before; and possibly the red dog clarion was right.tennessee's partner was not in the group that surrounded the ominous tree. but as they turned to disperse attention was drawn to the singular appearance of a motionless donkey cart halted at the side of the road. as they approached, they at once recognized the venerable "jenny" and the two-wheeled cart as the property of tennessee's partner--used by him in carrying dirt from his claim; and a few paces distant the owner of the equipage himself, sitting under a buckeye tree, wiping the perspiration from his glowing face. in answer to an inquiry, he said he had come for the body of the "diseased," "if it was all the same to the committee." he didn't wish to "hurry anything"; he could "wait." he was not working that day; and when the gentlemen were done with the "diseased," he would take him. "ef thar is any present," he added, in his simple, serious way, "as would care to jine in the fun'l, they kin come." perhaps it was from a sense of humor, which i have already intimated was a feature of sandy bar--perhaps it was from something even better than that; but two-thirds of the loungers accepted the invitation at once.it was noon when the body of tennessee was delivered into the hands of his partner. as the cart drew up to the fatal tree, we noticed that it contained a rough, oblong box--apparently made from a section of sluicing and half-filled with bark and the tassels of pine. the cart was further decorated with slips of willow, and made fragrant with buckeye blossoms. when the body was deposited in the box, tennessee's partner drew over it a piece of tarred canvas, and gravely mounting the narrow seat in front, with his feet upon the shafts, urged the little donkey forward. the equipage moved slowly on, at that decorous pace which was habitual with "jenny" even under less solemn circumstances. the men--half curiously, half jestingly, but all good-humoredly--strolled along beside the cart; some in advance, some a little in the rear of the homely catafalque. but, whether from the narrowing of the road or some present sense of decorum, as the cart passed on, the company fell to the rear in couples, keeping step, and otherwise assuming the external show of a formal procession. jack folinsbee, who had at the outset played a funeral march in dumb show upon an imaginary trombone, desisted, from a lack of sympathy and appreciation--not having, perhaps, your true humorist's capacity to be content with the enjoyment of his own fun.the way led through grizzly canyon--by this time clothed in funereal drapery and shadows. the redwoods, burying their moccasined feet in the red soil, stood in indian file along the track, trailing an uncouth benediction from their bending boughs upon the passing bier. a hare, surprised into helpless inactivity, sat upright and pulsating in the ferns by the roadside as the cortege went by. squirrels hastened to gain a secure outlook from higher boughs; and the bluejays, spreading their wings, fluttered before them like outriders, until the outskirts of sandy bar were reached, and the solitary cabin of tennessee's partner.viewed under more favorable circumstances, it would not have been a cheerful place. the unpicturesque site, the rude and unlovely outlines, the unsavory details, which distinguish the nest-building of the california miner, were all here, with the dreariness of decay superadded. a few paces from the cabin there was a rough enclosure, which in the brief days of tennessee's partner's matrimonial felicity had been used as a garden, but was now overgrown with fern. as we approached it we were surprised to find that what we had taken for a recent attempt at cultivation was the broken soil about an open grave.the cart was halted before the enclosure; and rejecting the offers of assistance with the same air of simple self-reliance he had displayed throughout, tennessee's partner lifted the rough coffin on his back and deposited it, unaided, within the shallow grave. he then nailed down the board which served as a lid; and mounting the little mound of earth beside it, took off his hat, and slowly mopped his face with his handkerchief. this the crowd felt was a preliminary to speech; and they disposed themselves variously on stumps and boulders, and sat expectant."when a man," began tennessee's partner, slowly, "has been running free all day, what's the natural thing for him to do? why, to come home. and if he ain't in a condition to go home, what can his best friend do? why, bring him home! and here's tennessee has been running free, and we brings him home from his wandering." he paused, and picked up a fragment of quartz, rubbed it thoughtfully on his sleeve, and went on: "it ain't the first time that i've packed him on my back, as you see'd me now. it ain't the first time that i brought him to this yer cabin when he couldn't help himself; it ain't the first time that i and 'jinny' have waited for him on yon hill, and picked him up and so fetched him home, when he couldn't speak, and didn't know me. and now that it's the last time, why"--he paused and rubbed the quartz gently on his sleeve--"you see it's sort of rough on his pardner. and now, gentlemen," he added, abruptly, picking up his long-handled shovel, "the fun'l's over; and my thanks, and tennessee's thanks, to you for your trouble."resisting any proffers of assistance, he began to fill in the grave, turning his back upon the crowd that after a few moments' hesitation gradually withdrew. as they crossed the little ridge that hid sandy bar from view, some, looking back, thought they could see tennessee's partner, his work done, sitting upon the grave, his shovel between his knees, and his face buried in his red bandanna handkerchief. but it was argued by others that you couldn't tell his face from his handkerchief at that distance; and this point remained undecided.in the reaction that followed the feverish excitement of that day, tennessee's partner was not forgotten. a secret investigation had cleared him of any complicity in tennessee's guilt, and left only a suspicion of his general sanity. sandy bar made a point of calling on him, and proffering various uncouth, but well-meant kindnesses. but from that day his rude health and great strength seemed visibly to decline; and when the rainy season fairly set in, and the tiny grass-blades were beginning to peep from the rocky mound above tennessee's grave, he took to his bed. one night, when the pines beside the cabin were swaying in the storm, and trailing their slender fingers over the roof, and the roar and rush of the swollen river were heard below, tennessee's partner lifted his head from the pillow, saying, "it is time to go for tennessee; i must put 'jinny' in the cart"; and would have risen from his bed but for the restraint of his attendant. struggling, he still pursued his singular fancy: "there, now, steady, 'jinny'--steady, old girl. how dark it is! look out for the ruts--and look out for him, too, old gal. sometimes, you know, when he's blind-drunk, he drops down right in the trail. keep on straight up to the pine on the top of the hill. thar--i told you so!--thar he is--coming this way, too--all by himself, sober, and his face a-shining. tennessee! pardner!"and so they met.one september night a family had gathered round their hearth, and piled it high with the driftwood of mountain streams, the dry cones of the pine, and the splintered ruins of great trees that had come crashing down the precipice. up the chimney roared the fire, and brightened the room with its broad blaze. the faces of the father and mother had a sober gladness; the children laughed; the eldest daughter was the image of happiness at seventeen; and the aged grandmother, who sat knitting in the warmest place, was the image of happiness grown old. they had found the "herb, heart's-ease," in the bleakest spot of all new england. this family were situated in the notch of the white hills, where the wind was sharp throughout the year, and pitilessly cold in the winter--giving their cottage all its fresh inclemency before it descended on the valley of the saco. they dwelt in a cold spot and a dangerous one; for a mountain towered above their heads, so steep, that the stones would often rumble down its sides and startle them at midnight.the daughter had just uttered some simple jest that filled them all with mirth, when the wind came through the notch and seemed to pause before their cottage--rattling the door, with a sound of wailing and lamentation, before it passed into the valley. for a moment it saddened them, though there was nothing unusual in the tones. but the family were glad again when they perceived that the latch was lifted by some traveller, whose footsteps had been unheard amid the dreary blast which heralded his approach, and wailed as he was entering, and went moaning away from the door.though they dwelt in such a solitude, these people held daily converse with the world. the romantic pass of the notch is a great artery, through which the life-blood of internal commerce is continually throbbing between maine, on one side, and the green mountains and the shores of the st. lawrence, on the other. the stage-coach always drew up before the door of the cottage. the way-farer, with no companion but his staff, paused here to exchange a word, that the sense of loneliness might not utterly overcome him ere he could pass through the cleft of the mountain, or reach the first house in the valley. and here the teamster, on his way to portland market, would put up for the night; and, if a bachelor, might sit an hour beyond the usual bedtime, and steal a kiss from the mountain maid at parting. it was one of those primitive taverns where the traveller pays only for food and lodging, but meets with a homely kindness beyond all price. when the footsteps were heard, therefore, between the outer door and the inner one, the whole family rose up, grandmother, children, and all, as if about to welcome someone who belonged to them, and whose fate was linked with theirs.the door was opened by a young man. his face at first wore the melancholy expression, almost despondency, of one who travels a wild and bleak road, at nightfall and alone, but soon brightened up when he saw the kindly warmth of his reception. he felt his heart spring forward to meet them all, from the old woman, who wiped a chair with her apron, to the little child that held out its arms to him. one glance and smile placed the stranger on a footing of innocent familiarity with the eldest daughter."ah, this fire is the right thing!" cried he; "especially when there is such a pleasant circle round it. i am quite benumbed; for the notch is just like the pipe of a great pair of bellows; it has blown a terrible blast in my face all the way from bartlett.""then you are going towards vermont?" said the master of the house, as he helped to take a light knapsack off the young man's shoulders."yes; to burlington, and far enough beyond," replied he. "i meant to have been at ethan crawford's tonight; but a pedestrian lingers along such a road as this. it is no matter; for, when i saw this good fire, and all your cheerful faces, i felt as if you had kindled it on purpose for me, and were waiting my arrival. so i shall sit down among you, and make myself at home."the frank-hearted stranger had just drawn his chair to the fire when something like a heavy footstep was heard without, rushing down the steep side of the mountain, as with long and rapid strides, and taking such a leap in passing the cottage as to strike the opposite precipice. the family held their breath, because they knew the sound, and their guest held his by instinct."the old mountain has thrown a stone at us, for fear we should forget him," said the landlord, recovering himself. "he sometimes nods his head and threatens to come down; but we are old neighbors, and agree together pretty well upon the whole. besides we have a sure place of refuge hard by if he should be coming in good earnest."let us now suppose the stranger to have finished his supper of bear's meat; and, by his natural felicity of manner, to have placed himself on a footing of kindness with the whole family, so that they talked as freely together as if he belonged to their mountain brood. he was of a proud, yet gentle spirit--haughty and reserved among the rich and great; but ever ready to stoop his head to the lowly cottage door, and be like a brother or a son at the poor man's fireside. in the household of the notch he found warmth and simplicity of feeling, the pervading intelligence of new england, and a poetry of native growth, which they had gathered when they little thought of it from the mountain peaks and chasms, and at the very threshold of their romantic and dangerous abode. he had travelled far and alone; his whole life, indeed, had been a solitary path; for, with the lofty caution of his nature, he had kept himself apart from those who might otherwise have been his companions. the family, too, though so kind and hospitable, had that consciousness of unity among themselves, and separation from the world at large, which, in every domestic circle, should still keep a holy place where no stranger may intrude. but this evening a prophetic sympathy impelled the refined and educated youth to pour out his heart before the simple mountaineers, and constrained them to answer him with the same free confidence. and thus it should have been. is not the kindred of a common fate a closer tie than that of birth?the secret of the young man's character was a high and abstracted ambition. he could have borne to live an undistinguished life, but not to be forgotten in the grave. yearning desire had been transformed to hope; and hope, long cherished, had become like certainty, that, obscurely as he journeyed now, a glory was to beam on all his pathway-though not, perhaps, while he was treading it. but when posterity should gaze back into the gloom of what was now the present, they would trace the brightness of his footsteps, brightening as meaner glories faded, and confess that a gifted one had passed from his cradle to his tomb with none to recognize him."as yet," cried the stranger--his cheek glowing and his eye flashing with enthusiasm--"as yet, i have done nothing. were i to vanish from the earth tomorrow, none would know so much of me as you: that a nameless youth came up at nightfall from the valley of the saco, and opened his heart to you in the evening, and passed through the notch by sunrise, and was seen no more. not a soul would ask, 'who was he? whither did the wanderer go?' but i cannot die till i have achieved my destiny. then, let death come! i shall have built my monument!"there was a continual flow of natural emotion, gushing forth amid abstracted reverie, which enabled the family to understand this young man's sentiments, though so foreign from their own. with quick sensibility of the ludicrous, he blushed at the ardor into which he had been betrayed."you laugh at me," said he, taking the eldest daughter's hand, and laughing himself. "you think my ambition as nonsensical as if i were to freeze myself to death on the top of mount washington, only that people might spy at me from the country round about. and, truly, that would be a noble pedestal for a man's statue!""it is better to sit here by this fire," answered the girl, blushing, "and be comfortable and contented, though nobody thinks about us.""i suppose," said her father, after a fit of musing, "there is something natural in what the young man says; and if my mind had been turned that way, i might have felt just the same. it is strange, wife, how his talk has set my head running on things that are pretty certain never to come to pass.""perhaps they may," observed the wife. "is the man thinking what he will do when he is a widower?""no, no!" cried he, repelling the idea with reproachful kindness. "when i think of your death, esther, i think of mine, too. but i was wishing we had a good farm in bartlett, or bethlehem, or littleton, or some other township round the white mountains; but not where they could tumble on our heads. i should want to stand well with my neighbors and be called squire, and sent to general court for a term or two; for a plain, honest man may do as much good there as a lawyer. and when i should be grown quite an old man, and you an old woman, so as not to be long apart, i might die happy enough in my bed, and leave you all crying around me. a slate gravestone would suit me as well as a marble one--with just my name and age, and a verse of a hymn, and something to let people know that i lived an honest man and died a christian.""there now!" exclaimed the stranger; "it is our nature to desire a monument, be it slate or marble, or a pillar of granite, or a glorious memory in the universal heart of man.""we're in a strange way, tonight," said the wife, with tears in her eyes. "they say it's a sign of something, when folks' minds go a-wandering so. hark to the children!"they listened accordingly. the younger children had been put to bed in another room, but with an open door between, so that they could be heard talking busily among themselves. one and all seemed to have caught the infection from the fireside circle, and were outvying each other in wild wishes, and childish projects, of what they would do when they came to be men and women. at length a little boy, instead of addressing his brothers and sisters, called out to his mother."i'll tell you what i wish, mother," cried he. "i want you and father and grandma'm, and all of us, and the stranger too, to start right away, and go and take a drink out of the basin of the flume!"nobody could help laughing at the child's notion of leaving a warm bed, and dragging them from a cheerful fire, to visit the basin of the flume--a brook, which tumbles over the precipice, deep within the notch. the boy had hardly spoken when a wagon rattled along the road, and stopped a moment before the door. it appeared to contain two or three men, who were cheering their hearts with the rough chorus of a song, which resounded, in broken notes, between the cliffs, while the singers hesitated whether to continue their journey or put up here for the night."father," said the girl, "they are calling you by name."but the good man doubted whether they had really called him, and was unwilling to show himself too solicitous of gain by inviting people to patronize his house. he therefore did not hurry to the door; and the lash being soon applied, the travellers plunged into the notch, still singing and laughing, though their music and mirth came back drearily from the heart of the mountain."there, mother!" cried the boy, again. "they'd have given us a ride to the flume."again they laughed at the child's pertinacious fancy for a night ramble. but it happened that a light cloud passed over the daughter's spirit; she looked gravely into the fire, and drew a breath that was almost a sigh. it forced its way, in spite of a little struggle to repress it. then starting and blushing, she looked quickly round the circle, as if they had caught a glimpse into her bosom. the stranger asked what she had been thinking of."nothing," answered she, with a downcast smile. "only i felt lonesome just then.""oh, i have always had a gift of feeling what is in other people's hearts," said he, half seriously. "shall i tell the secrets of yours? for i know what to think when a young girl shivers by a warm hearth, and complains of lonesomeness at her mother's side. shall i put these feelings into words?""they would not be a girl's feelings any longer if they could be put into words," replied the mountain nymph, laughing, but avoiding his eye.all this was said apart. perhaps a germ of love was springing in their hearts, so pure that it might blossom in paradise, since it could not be matured on earth; for women worship such gentle dignity as his; and the proud, contemplative, yet kindly soul is oftenest captivated by simplicity like hers. but while they spoke softly, and he was watching the happy sadness, the lightsome shadows, the shy yearnings of a maiden's nature, the wind through the notch took a deeper and drearier sound. it seemed, as the fanciful stranger said, like the choral strain of the spirits of the blast, who in old indian times had their dwelling among these mountains, and made their heights and recesses a sacred region.there was a wail along the road, as if a funeral were passing. to chase away the gloom, the family threw pine branches on their fire, till the dry leaves crackled and the flame arose, discovering once again a scene of peace and humble happiness. the light hovered about them fondly, and caressed them all. there were the little faces of the children, peeping from their bed apart, and here the father's frame of strength, the mother's subdued and careful mien, the high-browed youth, the budding girl, and the good old grandam, still knitting in the warmest place. the aged woman looked up from her task, and, with fingers ever busy, was the next to speak."old folks have their notions," said she, "as well as young ones. you've been wishing and planning; and letting your heads run on one thing and another, till you've set my mind a-wandering too. now what should an old woman wish for, when she can go but a step or two before she comes to her grave? children, it will haunt me night and day till i tell you.""what is it, mother?" cried the husband and wife at once.then the old woman, with an air of mystery which drew the circle closer round the fire, informed them that she had provided her grave-clothes some years before--a nice linen shroud, a cap with a muslin ruff, and everything of a finer sort than she had worn since her wedding day. but this evening an old superstition had strangely recurred to her. it used to be said, in her younger days, that if anything were amiss with a corpse, if only the ruff were not smooth, or the cap did not set right, the corpse in the coffin and beneath the clods would strive to put up its cold hands and arrange it. the bare thought made her nervous."don't talk so, grandmother!" said the girl, shuddering."now," continued the old woman, with singular earnestness, yet smiling strangely at her own folly, "i want one of you, my children- when your mother is dressed and in the coffin--i want one of you to hold a looking-glass over my face. who knows but i may take a glimpse at myself, and see whether all's right?""old and young, we dream of graves and monuments," murmured the stranger youth. "i wonder how mariners feel when the ship is sinking, and they, unknown and undistinguished, are to be buried together in the ocean--that wide and nameless sepulchre?"for a moment, the old woman's ghastly conception so engrossed the minds of her hearers that a sound abroad in the night, rising like the roar of a blast, had grown broad, deep, and terrible, before the fated group were conscious of it. the house and all within it trembled; the foundations of the earth seemed to be shaken, as if this awful sound were the peal of the last trump. young and old exchanged one wild glance, and remained an instant, pale, affrighted, without utterance, or power to move. then the same shriek burst simultaneously from all their lips."the slide! the slide!"the simplest words must intimate, but not portray, the unutterable horror of the catastrophe. the victims rushed from their cottage, and sought refuge in what they deemed a safer spot--where, in contemplation of such an emergency, a sort of barrier had been reared. alas! they had quitted their security, and fled right into the pathway of destruction. down came the whole side of the mountain, in a cataract of ruin. just before it reached the house, the stream broke into two branches--shivered not a window there, but overwhelmed the whole vicinity, blocked up the road, and annihilated everything in its dreadful course. long ere the thunder of the great slide had ceased to roar among the mountains, the mortal agony had been endured, and the victims were at peace. their bodies were never found.the next morning, the light smoke was seen stealing from the cottage chimney up the mountain side. within, the fire was yet smouldering on the hearth, and the chairs in a circle round it, as if the inhabitants had but gone forth to view the devastation of the slide, and would shortly return, to thank heaven for their miraculous escape. all had left separate tokens, by which those who had known the family were made to shed a tear for each. who has not heard their name? the story has been told far and wide, and will forever be a legend of these mountains. poets have sung their fate.there were circumstances which led some to suppose that a stranger had been received into the cottage on this awful night, and had shared the catastrophe of all its inmates. others denied that there were sufficient grounds for such a conjecture. wo for the high-souled youth, with his dream of earthly immortality! his name and person utterly unknown; his history, his way of life, his plans, a mystery never to be solved, his death and his existence equally a doubt! whose was the agony of that death moment?bartram the lime-burner, a rough, heavy-looking man, begrimed with charcoal, sat watching his kiln, at nightfall, while his little son played at building houses with the scattered fragments of marble, when, on the hill-side below them, they heard a roar of laughter, not mirthful, but slow, and even solemn, like a wind shaking the boughs of the forest."father, what is that" asked the little boy, leaving his play, and pressing betwixt his father's knees."o, some drunken man, i suppose," answered the lime-burner; "some merry fellow from the bar-room in the village, who dared not laugh loud enough within doors, lest he should blow the roof of the house off. so here he is, shaking his jolly sides at the foot of gray-lock.""but, father," said the child, more sensitive than the obtuse, middle-aged clown, "he does not laugh like a man that is glad. so the noise frightens me!""don't be a fool, child!" cried his father, gruffly. "you will never make a man, i do believe; there is too much of your mother in you. i have known the rustling of a leaf startle you. hark! here comes the merry fellow, now. you shall see that there is no harm in him."bartram and his little son, while they were talking thus, sat watching the same lime-kiln that had been the scene of ethan brand's solitary and meditative life, before he began his search for the unpardonable sin. many years, as we have seen, had now elapsed, since that portentous night when the idea was first developed. the kiln, however, on the mountain-side, stood unimpaired, and was in nothing changed since he had thrown his dark thoughts into the intense glow of its furnace, and melted them, as it were, into the one thought that took possession of his life. it was a rude, round, tower-like structure, about twenty feet high, heavily built of rough stones, and with a hillock of earth heaped about the larger part of its circumference; so that the blocks and fragments of marble might be drawn by cart-loads, and thrown in at the top. there was an opening at the bottom of the tower, like an oven-mouth, but large enough to admit a man in a stooping posture, and provided with a massive iron door. with the smoke and jets of flame issuing from the chinks and crevices of this door, which seemed to give admittance into the hill-side, it resembled nothing so much as the private entrance to the infernal regions, which the shepherds of the delectable mountains were accustomed to show to pilgrims.there are  many such lime-kilns in that tract of country, for the purpose of burning the white marble which composes a large part of the substance of the hills. some of them, built years ago, and long deserted, with weeds growing in the vacant round of the interior, which is open to the sky, and grass and wild-flowers rooting themselves into the chinks of the stones, look already like relics of antiquity, and may yet be overspread with the lichens of centuries to come. others, where the lime-burner still feeds his daily and nightlong fire, afford points of interest to the wanderer among the hills, who seats himself on a log of wood or a fragment of marble, to hold a chat with the solitary man. it is a lonesome, and, when the character is inclined to thought, may be an intensely thoughtful occupation; as it proved in the case of ethan brand, who had mused to such strange purpose, in days gone by, while the fire in this very kiln was burning.the man who now watched the fire was of a different order, and troubled himself with no thoughts save the very few that were requisite to his business. at frequent intervals, he flung back the clashing weight of the iron door, and, turning his face from the insufferable glare, thrust in huge logs of oak, or stirred the immense brands with a long pole. within the furnace were seen the curling and riotous flames, and the burning marble, almost molten with the intensity of heat; while without, the reflection of the fire quivered on the dark intricacy of the surrounding forest, and showed in the foreground a bright and ruddy little picture of the hut, the spring beside its door, the athletic and coal-begrimed figure of the lime-burner, and the half-frightened child, shrinking into the protection of his father's shadow. and when again the iron door was closed, then reappeared the tender light of the half-full moon, which vainly strove to trace out the indistinct shapes of the neighboring mountains; and, in the upper sky, there was a flitting congregation of clouds, still faintly tinged with the rosy sunset, though thus far down into the valley the sunshine had vanished long and long ago.the little boy now crept still closer to his father, as footsteps were heard ascending the hill-side, and a human form thrust aside the bushes that clustered beneath the trees."halloo! who is it?" cried the lime-burner, vexed at his son's timidity, yet half infected by it. "come forward, and show yourself, like a man, or i'll fling this chunk of marble at your head!""you offer me a rough welcome," said a gloomy voice, as the unknown man drew nigh. "yet i neither claim nor desire a kinder one, even at my own fireside."to obtain a distincter view, bartram threw open the iron door of the kiln, whence immediately issued a gush of fierce light, that smote full upon the stranger's face and figure. to a careless eye there appeared nothing very remarkable in his aspect, which was that of a man in a coarse, brown, country-made suit of clothes, tall and thin, with the staff and heavy shoes of a wayfarer. as he advanced, he fixed his eyes--which were very bright--intently upon the brightness of the furnace, as if he beheld, or expected to behold, some object worthy of note within it."good evening, stranger," said the lime-burner; "whence come you, so late in the day?""i come from my search," answered the wayfarer; "for, at last, it is finished.""drunk!--or crazy!" muttered bartram to himself. "i shall have trouble with the fellow. the sooner i drive him away, the better."the little boy, all in a tremble, whispered to his father, and begged him to shut the door of the kiln, so that there might not be so much light; for that there was something in the man's face which he was afraid to look at, yet could not look away from. and, indeed, even the lime-burner's dull and torpid sense began to be impressed by an indescribable something in that thin, rugged, thoughtful visage, with the grizzled hair hanging wildly about it, and those deeply-sunken eyes, which gleamed like fires within the entrance of a mysterious cavern. but, as he closed the door, the stranger turned towards him, and spoke in a quiet, familiar way, that made bartram feel as if he were a sane and sensible man, after all.:your task draws to an end, i see," said he. "this marble has already been burning three days. a few hours more will convert the stone to lime.""why, who are you?" exclaimed the lime-burner. "you seem as well acquainted with my business as i am myself.""and well i may be," said the stranger; "for i followed the same craft many a long year, and here, too, on this very spot. but you are a newcomer in these parts. did you never hear of ethan brand?""the man that went in search of the unpardonable sin?" asked bartram, with a laugh."the same," answered the stranger. "he has found what he sought, and therefore he comes back again.""what! then you are ethan brand himself?" cried the lime-burner, in amazement. "i am a newcomer here, as you say, and they call it eighteen years since you left the foot of gray-lock. but, i can tell you, the good folks still talk about ethan brand, in the village yonder, and what a strange errand took him away from his lime-kiln. well, and so you have found the unpardonable sin?""even so!" said the stranger, calmly."if the question is a fair one," proceeded bartram, "where might it be?"ethan brand laid his finger on his own heart."here!" replied he.and then, without mirth in his countenance, but as if moved by an involuntary recognition of the infinite absurdity of seeking throughout the world for what was the closest of all things to himself, and looking into every heart, save his own, for what was hidden in no other breast, he broke into a laugh of scorn. it was the same slow, heavy laugh, that had almost appalled the lime-burner when it heralded the wayfarer's approach.the solitary mountain-side was made dismal by it. laughter, when out of place, mistimed, or bursting forth from a disordered state of feeling, may be the most terrible modulation of the human voice. the laughter of one asleep, even if it be a little child--the madman's laugh--the wild, screaming laugh of a born idiot--are sounds that we sometimes tremble to hear, and would always willingly forget. poets have imagined no utterance of fiends or hobgoblins so fearfully appropriate as a laugh. and even the obtuse lime-burner felt his nerves shaken, as this strange man looked inward at his own heart, and burst into laughter that rolled away into the night, and was indistinctly reverberated among the hills."joe," said he to his little son, "scamper down to the tavern in the village, and tell the jolly fellows there that ethan brand has come back, and that he has found the unpardonable sin!"the boy darted away on his errand, to which ethan brand made no objection, nor seemed hardly to notice it. he sat on a log of wood, looking steadfastly at the iron door of the kiln. when the child was out of sight, and his swift and light footsteps ceased to be heard treading first on the fallen leaves and then on the rocky mountain path, the lime-burner began to regret his departure. he felt that the little fellow's presence had been a barrier between his guest and himself, and that he must now deal, heart to heart, with a man who, on his own confession, had committed the one only crime for which heaven could afford no mercy. that crime, in its indistinct blackness, seemed to overshadow him. the lime-burner's own sins rose up within him, and made his memory riotous with a throng of evil shapes that asserted their kindred with the master sin, whatever it might be, which it was within the scope of man's corrupted nature to conceive and cherish. they were all of one family; they went to and fro between his breast and ethan brand's, and carried dark greetings from one to the other.then bartram remembered the stories which had grown traditionary in reference to this strange man, who had come upon him like a shadow of the night, and was making himself at home in his old place, after so long absence that the dead people, dead and buried for years, would have had more right to be at home, in any familiar spot, than he. ethan brand, it was said, had conversed with satan himself in the lurid blaze of this very kiln. the legend had been matter of mirth heretofore but looked grisly now. according to this tale, before ethan brand departed on his search, he had been accustomed to evoke a fiend from the hot furnace of the lime-kiln, night after night, in order to confer with him about the unpardonable sin; the man and the fiend each laboring to frame the image of some mode of guilt which could neither be atoned for nor forgiven. and, with the first gleam of light upon the mountain-top, the fiend crept in at the iron door, there to abide the intensest element of fire, until again summoned forth to share in the dreadful task of extending man's possible guilt beyond the scope of heaven's else infinite mercy.while the lime-burner was struggling with the horror of these thoughts, ethan brand rose from the log, and flung open the door of the kiln. the action was in such accordance with the idea in bartram's mind, that he almost expected to see the evil one issue forth, red-hot from the raging furnace."hold! hold!" cried he, with a tremulous attempt to laugh; for he was ashamed of his fears, although they overmastered him. "don't, for mercy's sake, bring out your devil now!""man!" sternly replied ethan brand, "what need have i of the devil? i have left him behind me, on my track. it is with such halfway sinners as you that he busies himself. fear not because i open the door. i do but act by old custom, and am going to trim your fire, like a lime-burner, as i was once."he stirred the vast coals, thrust in more wood, and bent forward to gaze into the hollow prison-house of the fire, regardless of the fierce glow that reddened upon his face. the lime-burner sat watching him, and half suspected his strange guest of a purpose, if not to evoke a fiend, at least to plunge bodily into the flames, and thus vanish from the sight of man. ethan brand, however, drew quietly back, and closed the door of the kiln."i have looked," said he, "into many a human heart that was seven times hotter with sinful passions than yonder furnace is with fire. but i found not there what i sought. no, not the unpardonable sin!""what is the unpardonable sin?" asked the lime-burner; and then he shrank further from his companion, trembling lest his question should be answered."it is a sin that grew within my own breast," replied ethan brand, standing erect, with a pride that distinguishes all enthusiasts of his stamp. "a sin that grew nowhere else! the sin of an intellect that triumphed over the sense of brotherhood with man and reverence for god, and sacrificed everything to its own mighty claims! the only sin that deserves a recompense of immortal agony! freely, were it to do again, would i incur the guilt. unshrinkingly i accept the retribution!""the man's head is turned," muttered the lime-burner to himself. "he may be a sinner, like the rest of us--nothing more likely--but, i'll be sworn, he is a madman too."nevertheless he felt uncomfortable at his situation, alone with ethan brand on the wild mountain-side, and was right glad to hear the rough murmur of tongues, and the footsteps of what seemed a pretty numerous party, stumbling over the stones and rustling through the underbrush. soon appeared the whole lazy regiment that was wont to infest the village tavern comprehending three or four individuals who had drunk flip beside the bar-room fire through all the winters, and smoked their pipes beneath the stoop through all the summers, since ethan brand's departure. laughing boisterously, and mingling all their voices together in unceremonious talk, they now burst into the moonshine and narrow streaks of fire-light that illuminated the open space before the lime-kiln. bartram set the door ajar again, flooding the spot with light, that the whole company might get a fair view of ethan brand, and he of them.there, among other old acquaintances, was a once ubiquitous man, now almost extinct, but whom we were formerly sure to encounter at the hotel of every thriving village throughout the country. it was the stage-agent. the present specimen of the genus was a wilted and smoke-dried man, wrinkled and red-nosed, in a smartly cut, brown, bob-tailed coat, with brass buttons, who, for a length of time unknown, had kept his desk and corner in the bar-room, and was still puffing what seemed to be the same cigar that he had lighted twenty years before. he had great fame as a dry joker, though, perhaps, less on account of any intrinsic humor than from a certain flavor of brandy-toddy and tobacco-smoke, which impregnated all his ideas and expressions, as well as his person. another well-remembered though strangely altered face was that of lawyer giles, as people still called him in courtesy; an elderly ragamuffin, in his soiled shirt-sleeves and tow-cloth trousers. this poor fellow had been an attorney, in what he called his better days, a sharp practitioner, and in great vogue among the village litigants; but flip, and sling, and toddy, and cocktails, imbibed at all hours, morning, noon, and night, had caused him to slide from intellectual to various kinds and degrees of bodily labor, till, at last, to adopt his own phrase, he slid into a soap-vat. in other words, giles was now a soap-boiler, in a small way. he had come to be but the fragment of a human being, a part of one foot having been chopped off by an axe, and an entire hand torn away by the devilish grip of a steam-engine. yet, though the corporeal hand was gone, a spiritual member remained; for, stretching forth the stump, giles steadfastly averred that he felt an invisible thumb and fingers with as vivid a sensation as before the real ones were amputated. a maimed and miserable wretch he was; but one, nevertheless, whom the world could not trample on, and had no right to scorn, either in this or any previous stage of his misfortunes, since he had still kept up the courage and spirit of a man, asked nothing in charity, and with his one hand--and that the left one--fought a stern battle against want and hostile circumstances.among the throng, too, came another personage, who, with certain points of similarity to lawyer giles, had many more of difference. it was the village doctor; a man of some fifty years, whom, at an earlier period of his life, we introduced as paying a professional visit to ethan brand during the latter's supposed insanity. he was now a purple-visaged, rude, and brutal, yet half-gentlemanly figure, with something wild, ruined, and desperate in his talk, and in all the details of his gesture and manners. brandy possessed this man like an evil spirit, and made him as surly and savage as a wild beast, and as miserable as a lost soul; but there was supposed to be in him such wonderful skill, such native gifts of healing, beyond any which medical science could impart, that society caught hold of him, and would not let him sink out of its reach. so, swaying to and fro upon his horse, and grumbling thick accents at the bedside, he visited all the sick chambers for miles about among the mountain towns, and sometimes raised a dying man, as it were, by miracle, or quite as often, no doubt, sent his patient to a grave that was dug many a year too soon. the doctor had an everlasting pipe in his mouth, and, as somebody said, in allusion to his habit of swearing, it was always alight with hell-fire.these three worthies pressed forward, and greeted ethan brand each after his own fashion, earnestly inviting him to partake of the contents of a certain black bottle, in which, as they averred, he would find something far better worth seeking for than the unpardonable sin. no mind, which has wrought itself by intense and solitary meditation into a high state of enthusiasm, can endure the kind of contact with low and vulgar modes of thought and feeling to which ethan brand was now subjected. it made him doubt--and, strange to say, it was a painful doubt--whether he had indeed found the unpardonable sin, and found it within himself. the whole question on which he had exhausted life, and more than life, looked like a delusion."leave me," he said, bitterly, "ye brute beasts, that have made yourselves so, shrivelling up your souls with fiery liquors! i have done with you. years and years ago, i groped into your hearts, and found nothing there for my purpose. get ye gone!""why, you uncivil scoundrel," cried the fierce doctor, "is that the way you respond to the kindness of your best friends? then let me tell you the truth. you have no more found the unpardonable sin than yonder boy joe has. you are but a crazy fellow--i told you so twenty years ago--neither better nor worse than a crazy fellow, and the fit companion of old humphrey, here!"he pointed to an old man, shabbily dressed, with long white hair, thin visage, and unsteady eyes. for some years past this aged person had been wandering about among the hills, inquiring of all travellers whom he met for his daughter. the girl, it seemed, had gone off with a company of circus-performers; and occasionally tidings of her came to the village, and fine stories were told of her glittering appearance as she rode on horse-back in the ring, or performed marvellous feats on the tight-rope.the white-haired father now approached ethan brand, and gazed unsteadily into his face."they tell me you have been all over the earth," said he, wringing his hands with earnestness. "you must have seen my daughter, for she makes a grand figure in the world, and everybody goes to see her. did she send any word to her old father, or say when she was coming back?"ethan brand's eye quailed beneath the old man's. that daughter, from whom he so earnestly desired a word of greeting, was the esther of our tale, the very girl whom, with such cold and remorseless purpose, ethan brand had made the subject of a psychological experiment, and wasted, absorbed, and perhaps annihilated her soul, in the process."yes," murmured he, turning away from the hoary wanderer; "it is no delusion. there is an unpardonable sin!"while these things were passing, a merry scene was going forward in the area of cheerful light, beside the spring and before the door of the hut. a number of the youth of the village, young men and girls, had hurried up the hill-side, impelled by curiosity to see ethan brand, the hero of so many a legend familiar to their childhood. finding nothing, however, very remarkable in his aspect--nothing but a sun-burnt wayfarer, in plain garb and dusty shoes, who sat looking into the fire, as if he fancied pictures among the coals--these young people speedily grew tired of observing him. as it happened, there was other amusement at hand. an old german jew, travelling with a diorama on his back, was passing down the mountain-road towards the village just as the party turned aside from it, and, in hopes of eking out the profits of the day, the showman had kept them company to the lime-kiln."come, old dutchman," cried one of the young men, "let us see your pictures, if you can swear they are worth looking at!""o, yes, captain," answered the jew--whether as a matter of courtesy or craft, he styled everybody captain--"i shall show you, indeed, some very superb pictures!"so, placing his box in a proper position, he invited the young men and girls to look through the glass orifices of the machine, and proceeded to exhibit a series of the most outrageous scratchings and daubings, as specimens of the fine arts, that ever an itinerant showman had the face to impose upon his circle of spectators. the pictures were worn out, moreover, tattered, full of cracks and wrinkles, dingy with tobacco-smoke, and otherwise in a most pitiable condition. some purported to be cities, public edifices, and ruined castles in europe; others represented napoleon's battles and nelson's sea-fights; and in the midst of these would be seen a gigantic, brown, hairy hand--which might have been mistaken for the hand of destiny, though, in truth, it was only the showman's--pointing its forefinger to various scenes of the conflict, while its owner gave historical illustrations. when, with much merriment at its abominable deficiency of merit, the exhibition was concluded, the german bade little joe put his head into the box. viewed through the magnifying glasses, the boy's round, rosy visage assumed the strangest imaginable aspect of an immense titanic child, the mouth grinning broadly, and the eyes and every other feature overflowing with fun at the joke. suddenly, however, that merry face turned pale, and its expression changed to horror, for this easily impressed and excitable child had become sensible that the eye of ethan brand was fixed upon him through the glass."you make the little man to be afraid, captain," said the german jew, turning up the dark and strong outline of his visage, from his stooping posture. "but look again, and, by chance, i shall cause you to see somewhat that is very fine, upon my word!"ethan brand gazed into the box for an instant, and then starting back, looked fixedly at the german. what had he seen? nothing, apparently; for a curious youth, who had peeped in almost at the same moment, beheld only a vacant space of canvas."i remember you now," muttered ethan brand to the showman."ah, captain," whispered the jew of nuremberg, with a dark smile, "i find it to be a heavy matter in my show-box--this unpardonable sin! by my faith, captain, it has wearied my shoulders, this long day, to carry it over the mountain.""peace," answered ethan brand, sternly, "or get thee into the furnace yonder!"the jew's exhibition had scarcely concluded, when a great, elderly dog--who seemed to be his own master, as no person in the company laid claim to him--saw fit to render himself the object of public notice. hitherto, he had shown himself a very quiet, well disposed old dog, going round from one to another, and, by way of being sociable, offering his rough head to be patted by any kindly hand that would take so much trouble. but now, all of a sudden, this grave and venerable quadruped, of his own mere motion, and without the slightest suggestion from anybody else, began to run round after his tail, which, to heighten the absurdity of the proceeding, was a great deal shorter than it should have been. never was seen such headlong eagerness in pursuit of an object that could not possibly be attained; never was heard such a tremendous outbreak of growling, snarling, barking, and snapping--as if one end of the ridiculous brute's body were at deadly and most unforgivable enmity with the other. faster and faster, round about went the cur; and faster and still faster fled the unapproachable brevity of his tail; and louder and fiercer grew his yells of rage and animosity; until, utterly exhausted, and as far from the goal as ever, the foolish old dog ceased his performance as suddenly as he had begun it. the next moment he was as mild, quiet, sensible, and respectable in his deportment, as when he first scraped acquaintance with the company.as may be supposed, the exhibition was greeted with universal laughter, clapping of hands, and shouts of encore, to which the canine performer responded by wagging all that there was to wag of his tail, but appeared totally unable to repeat his very successful effort to amuse the spectators.meanwhile, ethan brand had resumed his seat upon the log, and moved, it might be, by a perception of some remote analogy between his own case and that of this self-pursuing cur, he broke into the awful laugh, which, more than any other token, expressed the condition of his inward being. from that moment, the merriment of the party was at an end; they stood aghast, dreading lest the inauspicious sound should be reverberated around the horizon, and that mountain would thunder it to mountain, and so the horror be prolonged upon their ears. then, whispering one to another that it was late--that the moon was almost down--that the august night was growing chill--they hurried homewards leaving the lime-burner and little joe to deal as they might with their unwelcome guest. save for these three human beings, the open space on the hill-side was a solitude, set in a vast gloom of forest. beyond that darksome verge, the fire-light glimmered on the stately trunks and almost black foliage of pines, intermixed with the lighter verdure of sapling oaks, maples, and poplars, while here and there lay the gigantic corpses of dead trees, decaying on the leaf-strewn soil. and it seemed to little joe--a timorous and imaginative child--that the silent forest was holding its breath, until some fearful thing should happen.ethan brand thrust more wood into the fire, and closed the door of the kiln; then looking over his shoulder at the lime-burner and his son, he bade, rather than advised, them to retire to rest."for myself, i cannot sleep," said he. "i have matters that it concerns me to meditate upon. i will watch the fire, as i used to do in the old time.""and call the devil out of the furnace to keep you company, i suppose," muttered bartram, who had been making intimate acquaintance with the black bottle above-mentioned. "but watch, if you like, and call as many devils as you like! for my part, i shall be all the better for a snooze. come, joe!"as the boy followed his father into the hut, he looked back at the wayfarer, and the tears came into his eyes, for his tender spirit had an intuition of the bleak and terrible loneliness in which this man had enveloped himself.when they had gone, ethan brand sat listening to the crackling of the kindled wood, and looking at the little spirts of fire that issued through the chinks of the door. these trifles, however, once so familiar, had but the slightest hold of his attention, while deep within his mind he was reviewing the gradual but marvellous change that had been wrought upon him by the search to which he had devoted himself. he remembered how the night dew had fallen upon him--how the dark forest had whispered to him--how the stars had gleamed upon him--a simple and loving man, watching his fire in the years gone by, and ever musing as it burned. he remembered with what tenderness, with what love and sympathy for mankind, and what pity for human guilt and woe, he had first begun to contemplate those ideas which afterwards became the inspiration of his life; with what reverence he had then looked into the heart of man, viewing it as a temple originally divine, and, however desecrated, still to be held sacred by a brother; with what awful fear he had deprecated the success of his pursuit, and prayed that the unpardonable sin might never be revealed to him. then ensued that vast intellectual development, which, in its progress, disturbed the counterpoise between his mind and heart. the idea that possessed his life had operated as a means of education; it had gone on cultivating his powers to the highest point of which they were susceptible; it had raised him from the level of an unlettered laborer to stand on a star-lit eminence, whither the philosophers of the earth, laden with the lore of universities, might vainly strive to clamber after him. so much for the intellect! but where was the heart? that, indeed, had withered--had contracted--had hardened--had perished! it had ceased to partake of the universal throb. he had lost his hold of the magnetic chain of humanity. he was no longer a brother-man, opening the chambers or the dungeons of our common nature by the key of holy sympathy, which gave him a right to share in all its secrets; he was now a cold observer, looking on mankind as the subject of his experiment, and, at length, converting man and woman to be his puppets, and pulling the wires that moved them to such degrees of crime as were demanded for his study.thus ethan brand became a fiend. he began to be so from the moment that his moral nature had ceased to keep the pace of improvement with his intellect. and now, as his highest effort and inevitable development--as the bright and gorgeous flower, and rich, delicious fruit of his life's labor--he had produced the unpardonable sin!what more have i to seek? what more to achieve?" said ethan brand to himself. "my task is done, and well done!"starting from the log with a certain alacrity in his gait, and ascending the hillock of earth that was raised against the stone circumference of the lime-kiln, he thus reached the top of the structure. it was a space of perhaps ten feet across, from edge to edge, presenting a view of the upper surface of the immense mass of broken marble with which the kiln was heaped. all these innumerable blocks and fragments of marble were red-hot and vividly on fire, sending up great spouts of blue flame, which quivered aloft and danced madly, as within a magic circle, and sank and rose again, with continual and multitudinous activity. as the lonely man bent forward over this terrible body of fire, the blasting heat smote up against his person with a breath that, it might be scorched and shrivelled him up in a moment.ethan brand stood erect, and raised his arms on high. the blue flames played upon his face, and imparted the wild and ghastly light which alone could have suited its expression; it was that of a fiend on the verge of plunging into his gulf of intensest torment."o mother earth," cried he, "who art no more my mother, and into whose bosom this frame shall never be resolved! o mankind, whose brotherhood i have cast off, and trampled thy great heart beneath my feet! o stars of heaven, that shone on me of old, as if to light me onward and upward!--farewell all, and forever. come, deadly element of fire--henceforth my familiar friend! embrace me, as i do thee!"that night the sound of a fearful peal of laughter rolled heavily through the sleep of the lime-burner and his little son; dim shapes of horror and anguish haunted their dreams, and seemed still present in the rude hovel, when they opened their eyes to the daylight."up, boy, up!" cried the lime-burner, staring about him. "thank heaven, the night is gone, at last; and rather than pass such another, i would watch my lime-kiln, wide awake, for a twelvemonth. this ethan brand, with his humbug of an unpardonable sin, has done me no such mighty favor, in taking my place!"he issued from the hut, followed by little joe, who kept fast hold of his father's hand. the early sunshine was already pouring its gold upon the mountain-tops; and though the valleys were still in shadow, they smiled cheerfully in the promise of the bright day that was hastening onward. the village, completely shut in by hills, which swelled away gently about it, looked as if it had rested peacefully in the hollow of the great hand of providence. every dwelling was distinctly visible; the little spires of the two churches pointed upwards, and caught a fore-glimmering of brightness from the sun-gilt skies upon their gilded weather-cocks. the tavern was astir, and the figure of the old, smoke-dried stage-agent, cigar in mouth, was seen beneath the stoop. old graylock was glorified with a golden cloud upon his head. scattered likewise over the breasts of the surrounding mountains, there were heaps of hoary mist, in fantastic shapes, some of them far down into the valley, others high up towards the summits and still others, of the same family of mist or cloud, hovering in the gold radiance of the upper atmosphere. stepping from one to another of the clouds that rested on the hills, and thence to the loftier brotherhood that sailed in air, it seemed almost as if a mortal man might thus ascend into the heavenly regions. earth was so mingled with sky that it was a day-dream to look at it.to supply that charm of the familiar and homely, which nature so readily adopts into a scene like this, the stage-coach was rattling down the mountain-road, and the driver sounded his horn, while echo caught up the notes, and intertwined them into a rich and varied and elaborate harmony, of which the original performer could lay claim to little share. the great hills played a concert among themselves, each contributing a strain of airy sweetness.little joe's face brightened at once."dear father," cried he, skipping cheerily to and fro, "that strange man is gone, and the sky and the mountains all seem glad of it!""yes," growled the lime-burner, with an oath, "but he has let the fire go down, and no thanks to him if five hundred bushels of lime are not spoiled. if i catch the fellow hereabouts again, i shall feel like tossing him into the furnace!"with his long pole in his hand, he ascended to the top of the kiln. after a moment's pause, he called to his son."come up here, joe!" said he.so little joe ran up the hillock, and stood by his father's side. the marble was all burnt into perfect, snow-white lime. but on its surface, in the midst of the circle--snow-white too, and thoroughly converted into lime--lay a human skeleton, in the attitude of a person who, after long toil, lies down to long repose. within the ribs--strange to say--was the shape of a human heart."was the fellow's heart made of marble?" cried bartram, in some perplexity at this phenomenon. "at any rate, it is burnt into what looks like special good lime; and, taking all the bones together, my kiln is half a bushel the richer for him."so saying, the rude lime-burner lifted his pole, and, letting it fall upon the skeleton, the relics of ethan brand were crumbled into fragments.at nightfall, once in the olden time, on the rugged side of one of the crystal hills, a party of adventurers were refreshing themselves, after a toilsome and fruitless quest for the great carbuncle. they had come thither, not as friends nor partners in the enterprise, but each, save one youthful pair, impelled by his own selfish and solitary longing for this wondrous gem. their feeling of brotherhood, however, was strong enough to induce them to contribute a mutual aid in building a rude hut of branches, and kindling a great fire of shattered pines, that had drifted down the headlong current of the amonoosuck, on the lower bank of which they were to pass the night. there was but one of their number, perhaps, who had become so estranged from natural sympathies, by the absorbing spell of the pursuit, as to acknowledge no satisfaction at the sight of human faces, in the remote and solitary region whither they had ascended. a vast extent of wilderness lay between them and the nearest settlement, while a scant mile above their heads was that black verge where the hills throw off their shaggy mantle of forest trees, and either robe themselves in clouds or tower naked into the sky. the roar of the amonoosuck would have been too awful for endurance if only a solitary man had listened, while the mountain stream talked with the wind.the adventurers, therefore, exchanged hospitable greetings, and welcomed one another to the hut, where each man was the host, and all were the guests of the whole company. they spread their individual supplies of food on the flat surface of a rock, and partook of a general repast; at the close of which, a sentiment of good fellowship was perceptible among the party, though repressed by the idea, that the renewed search for the great carbuncle must make them strangers again in the morning. seven men and one young woman, they warmed themselves together at the fire, which extended its bright wall along the whole front of their wigwam. as they observed the various and contrasted figures that made up the assemblage, each man looking like a caricature of himself, in the unsteady light that flickered over him, they came mutually to the conclusion, that an odder society had never met, in city or wilderness, on mountain or plain.the eldest of the group, a tall, lean, weather-beaten man, some sixty years of age, was clad in the skins of wild animals, whose fashion of dress he did well to imitate, since the deer, the wolf, and the bear, had long been his most intimate companions. he was one of those ill-fated mortals, such as the indians told of, whom, in their early youth, the great carbuncle smote with a peculiar madness, and became the passionate dream of their existence. all who visited that region knew him as the seeker, and by no other name. as none could remember when he first took up the search, there went a fable in the valley of the saco, that for his inordinate lust after the great carbuncle, he had been condemned to wander among the mountains till the end of time, still with the same feverish hopes at sunrise--the same despair at eve. near this miserable seeker sat a little elderly personage, wearing a high-crowned hat, shaped somewhat like a crucible. he was from beyond the sea, a doctor cacaphodel, who had wilted and dried himself into a mummy by continually stooping over charcoal furnaces, and inhaling unwholesome fumes during his researches in chemistry and alchemy. it was told of him, whether truly or not, that at the commencement of his studies, he had drained his body of all its richest blood, and wasted it, with other inestimable ingredients, in an unsuccessful experiment--and had never been a well man since. another of the adventurers was master ichabod pigsnort, a weighty merchant and selectman of boston, and an elder of the famous mr. norton's church. his enemies had a ridiculous story that master pigsnort was accustomed to spend a whole hour after prayer time, every morning and evening, in wallowing naked among an immense quantity of pine-tree shillings, which were the earliest silver coinage of massachusetts. the fourth whom we shall notice had no name that his companions knew of, and was chiefly distinguished by a sneer that always contorted his thin visage, and by a prodigious pair of spectacles, which were supposed to deform and discolor the whole face of nature, to this gentleman's perception. the fifth adventurer likewise lacked a name, which was the greater pity, as he appeared to be a poet. he was a bright-eyed man, but wofully pined away, which was no more than natural, if, as some people affirmed, his ordinary diet was fog, morning mist, and a slice of the densest cloud within his reach, sauced with moonshine, whenever he could get it. certain it is, that the poetry which flowed from him had a smack of all these dainties the sixth of the party was a young man of haughty mien, and sat somewhat apart from the rest, wearing his plumed hat loftily among his elders, while the fire glittered on the rich embroidery of his dress, and gleamed intensely on the jewelled pommel of his sword. this was the lord de vere, who, when at home, was said to spend much of his time in the burial vault of his dead progenitors, rummaging their mouldy coffins in search of all the earthly pride and vainglory that was hidden among bones and dust; so that, besides his own share, he had the collected haughtiness of his whole line of ancestry.lastly, there was a handsome youth in rustic garb, and by his side a blooming little person, in whom a delicate shade of maiden reserve was just melting into the rich glow of a young wife's affection. her name was hannah and her husband's matthew; two homely names, yet well enough adapted to the simple pair, who seemed strangely out of place among the whimsical fraternity whose wits had been set agog by the great carbuncle.beneath the shelter of one hut, in the bright blaze of the same fire, sat this varied group of adventurers, all so intent upon a single object, that, of whatever else they began to speak, their closing words were sure to be illuminated with the great carbuncle. several related the circumstances that brought them thither. one had listened to a traveller's tale of this marvellous stone in his own distant country, and had immediately been seized with such a thirst for beholding it as could only be quenched in its intensest lustre. another, so long ago as when the famous captain smith visited these coasts, had seen it blazing far at sea, and had felt no rest in all the intervening years till now that he took up the search. a third, being encamped on a hunting expedition full forty miles south of the white mountains, awoke at midnight, and beheld the great carbuncle gleaming like a meteor, so that the shadows of the trees fell backward from it. they spoke of the innumerable attempts which had been made to reach the spot, and of the singular fatality which had hitherto withheld success from all adventurers, though it might seem so easy to follow to its source a light that overpowered the moon, and almost matched the sun. it was observable that each smiled scornfully at the madness of every other in anticipating better fortune than the past, yet nourished a scarcely hidden conviction that he would himself be the favored one. as if to allay their too sanguine hopes, they recurred to the indian traditions that a spirit kept watch about the gem, and bewildered those who sought it either by removing it from peak to peak of the higher hills, or by calling up a mist from the enchanted lake over which it hung. but these tales were deemed unworthy of credit, all professing to believe that the search had been baffled by want of sagacity or perseverance in the adventurers, or such other causes as might naturally obstruct the passage to any given point among the intricacies of forest, valley, and mountain.in a pause of the conversation the wearer of the prodigious spectacles looked round upon the party, making each individual, in turn, the object of the sneer which invariably dwelt upon his countenance."so, fellow-pilgrims," said he, "here we are, seven wise men, and one fair damsel--who, doubtless, is as wise as any graybeard of the company: here we are, i say, all bound on the same goodly enterprise. methinks, now, it were not amiss that each of us declare what he proposes to do with the great carbuncle, provided he have the good hap to clutch it. what says our friend in the bear skin? how mean you, good sir, to enjoy the prize which you have been seeking, the lord knows how long, among the crystal hills?""how enjoy it!" exclaimed the aged seeker, bitterly. "i hope for no enjoyment from it; that folly has passed long ago! i keep up the search for this accursed stone because the vain ambition of my youth has become a fate upon me in old age. the pursuit alone is my strength,--the energy of my soul,--the warmth of my blood,--and the pith and marrow of my bones! were i to turn my back upon it i should fall down dead on the hither side of the notch, which is the gateway of this mountain region. yet not to have my wasted lifetime back again would i give up my hopes of the great carbuncle! having found it, i shall bear it to a certain cavern that i wot of, and there, grasping it in my arms, lie down and die, and keep it buried with me forever.""o wretch, regardless of the interests of science!" cried doctor cacaphodel, with philosophic indignation. "thou art not worthy to behold, even from afar off, the lustre of this most precious gem that ever was concocted in the laboratory of nature. mine is the sole purpose for which a wise man may desire the possession of the great carbuncle. immediately on obtaining it--for i have a presentiment, good people that the prize is reserved to crown my scientific reputation--i shall return to europe, and employ my remaining years in reducing it to its first elements. a portion of the stone will i grind to impalpable powder; other parts shall be dissolved in acids, or whatever solvents will act upon so admirable a composition; and the remainder i design to melt in the crucible, or set on fire with the blow-pipe. by these various methods i shall gain an accurate analysis, and finally bestow the result of my labors upon the world in a folio volume.""excellent!" quoth the man with the spectacles. "nor need you hesitate, learned sir, on account of the necessary destruction of the gem; since the perusal of your folio may teach every mother's son of us to concoct a great carbuncle of his own.""but, verily," said master ichabod pigsnort, "for mine own part i object to the making of these counterfeits, as being calculated to reduce the marketable value of the true gem. i tell ye frankly, sirs, i have an interest in keeping up the price. here have i quitted my regular traffic, leaving my warehouse in the care of my clerks, and putting my credit to great hazard, and, furthermore, have put myself in peril of death or captivity by the accursed heathen savages--and all this without daring to ask the prayers of the congregation, because the quest for the great carbuncle is deemed little better than a traffic with the evil one. now think ye that i would have done this grievous wrong to my soul, body, reputation, and estate, without a reasonable chance of profit?""not i, pious master pigsnort," said the man with the spectacles. "i never laid such a great folly to thy charge.""truly, i hope not," said the merchant. "now, as touching this great carbuncle, i am free to own that i have never had a glimpse of it; but be it only the hundredth part so bright as people tell, it will surely outvalue the great mogul's best diamond, which he holds at an incalculable sum. wherefore, i am minded to put the great carbuncle on shipboard, and voyage with it to england, france, spain, italy, or into heathendom, if providence should send me thither, and, in a word, dispose of the gem to the best bidder among the potentates of the earth, that he may place it among his crown jewels. if any of ye have a wiser plan, let him expound it.""that have i, thou sordid man!" exclaimed the poet. "dost thou desire nothing brighter than gold that thou wouldst transmute all this ethereal lustre into such dross as thou wallowest in already? for myself, hiding the jewel under my cloak, i shall hie me back to my attic chamber, in one of the darksome alleys of london. there, night and day, will i gaze upon it; my soul shall drink its radiance; it shall be diffused throughout my intellectual powers, and gleam brightly in every line of poesy that i indite. thus, long ages after i am gone, the splendor of the great carbuncle will blaze around my name!""well said, master poet!" cried he of the spectacles. "hide it under thy cloak, sayest thou? why, it will gleam through the holes, and make thee look like a jack-o'-lantern!""to think!" ejaculated the lord de vere, rather to himself than his companions, the best of whom he held utterly unworthy of his intercourse --"to think that a fellow in a tattered cloak should talk of conveying the great carbuncle to a garret in grub street! have not i resolved within myself that the whole earth contains no fitter ornament for the great hall of my ancestral castle? there shall it flame for ages, making a noonday of midnight, glittering on the suits of armor, the banners, and escutcheons, that hang around the wall, and keeping bright the memory of heroes. wherefore have all other adventurers sought the prize in vain but that i might win it, and make it a symbol of the glories of our lofty line? and never, on the diadem of the white mountains, did the great carbuncle hold a place half so honored as is reserved for it in the hall of the de veres!""it is a noble thought," said the cynic, with an obsequious sneer. "yet, might i presume to say so, the gem would make a rare sepulchral lamp, and would display the glories of your lordship's progenitors more truly in the ancestral vault than in the castle hall.""nay, forsooth," observed matthew, the young rustic, who sat hand in hand with his bride, "the gentleman has bethought himself of a profitable use for this bright stone. hannah here and i are seeking it for a like purpose.""how, fellow!" exclaimed his lordship, in surprise. "what castle hall hast thou to hang it in?""no castle," replied matthew, "but as neat a cottage as any within sight of the crystal hills. ye must know, friends, that hannah and i, being wedded the last week, have taken up the search of the great carbuncle, because we shall need its light in the long winter evenings; and it will be such a pretty thing to show the neighbors when they visit us. it will shine through the house so that we may pick up a pin in any corner and will set all the windows aglowing as if there were a great fire of pine knots in the chimney. and then how pleasant, when we awake in the night, to be able to see one another's faces!"there was a general smile among the adventurers at the simplicity of the young couple's project in regard to this wondrous and invaluable stone, with which the greatest monarch on earth might have been proud to adorn his palace. especially the man with spectacles, who had sneered at all the company in turn, now twisted his visage into such an expression of ill-natured mirth, that matthew asked him, rather peevishly, what he himself meant to do with the great carbuncle."the great carbuncle!" answered the cynic, with ineffable scorn. "why, you blockhead, there is no such thing in rerum natura. i have come three thousand miles, and am resolved to set my foot on every peak of these mountains, and poke my head into every chasm, for the sole purpose of demonstrating to the satisfaction of any man one whit less an ass than thyself that the great carbuncle is all a humbug!"vain and foolish were the motives that had brought most of the adventurers to the crystal hills; but none so vain, so foolish, and so impious too, as that of the scoffer with the prodigious spectacles. he was one of those wretched and evil men whose yearnings are downward to the darkness, instead of heavenward, and who, could they but extinguish the lights which god hath kindled for us, would count the midnight gloom their chiefest glory. as the cynic spoke, several of the party were startled by a gleam of red splendor, that showed the huge shapes of the surrounding mountains and the rock-bestrewn bed of the turbulent river with an illumination unlike that of their fire on the trunks and black boughs of the forest trees. they listened for the roll of thunder, but heard nothing, and were glad that the tempest came not near them. the stars, those dial points of heaven, now warned the adventurers to close their eyes on the blazing logs, and open them, in dreams, to the glow of the great carbuncle.the young married couple had taken their lodgings in the farthest corner of the wigwam, and were separated from the rest of the party by a curtain of curiously-woven twigs, such as might have hung, in deep festoons, around the bridal-bower of eve. the modest little wife had wrought this piece of tapestry while the other guests were talking. she and her husband fell asleep with hands tenderly clasped, and awoke from visions of unearthly radiance to meet the more blessed light of one another's eyes. they awoke at the same instant, and with one happy smile beaming over their two faces, which grew brighter with their consciousness of the reality of life and love. but no sooner did she recollect where they were, than the bride peeped through the interstices of the leafy curtain, and saw that the outer room of the hut was deserted."up, dear matthew!" cried she, in haste. "the strange folk are all gone! up, this very minute, or we shall lose the great carbuncle!"in truth, so little did these poor young people deserve the mighty prize which had lured them thither, that they had slept peacefully all night, and till the summits of the hills were glittering with sunshine; while the other adventurers had tossed their limbs in feverish wakefulness, or dreamed of climbing precipices, and set off to realize their dreams with the earliest peep of dawn. but matthew and hannah, after their calm rest, were as light as two young deer, and merely stopped to say their prayers and wash themselves in a cold pool of the amonoosuck, and then to taste a morsel of food, ere they turned their faces to the mountain-side. it was a sweet emblem of conjugal affection, as they toiled up the difficult ascent, gathering strength from the mutual aid which they afforded. after several little accidents, such as a torn robe, a lost shoe, and the entanglement of hannah's hair in a bough, they reached the upper verge of the forest, and were now to pursue a more adventurous course. the innumerable trunks and heavy foliage of the trees had hitherto shut in their thoughts, which now shrank affrighted from the region of wind and cloud and naked rocks and desolate sunshine, that rose immeasurably above them. they gazed back at the obscure wilderness which they had traversed, and longed to be buried again in its depths rather than trust themselves to so vast and visible a solitude."shall we go on?" said matthew, throwing his arm round hannah's waist, both to protect her and to comfort his heart by drawing her close to it.but the little bride, simple as she was, had a woman's love of jewels, and could not forego the hope of possessing the very brightest in the world, in spite of the perils with which it must be won."let us climb a little higher," whispered she, yet tremulously, as she turned her face upward to the lonely sky."come, then," said matthew, mustering his manly courage and drawing her along with him, for she became timid again the moment that he grew bold.and upward, accordingly, went the pilgrims of the great carbuncle, now treading upon the tops and thickly-interwoven branches of dwarf pines, which, by the growth of centuries, though mossy with age, had barely reached three feet in altitude. next, they came to masses and fragments of naked rock heaped confusedly together, like a cairn reared by giants in memory of a giant chief. in this bleak realm of upper air nothing breathed, nothing grew; there was no life but what was concentrated in their two hearts; they had climbed so high that nature herself seemed no longer to keep them company. she lingered beneath them, within the verge of the forest trees, and sent a farewell glance after her children as they strayed where her own green footprints had never been. but soon they were to be hidden from her eye densely and dark the mists began to gather below, casting black spots of shadow on the vast landscape, and sailing heavily to one centre, as if the loftiest mountain peak had summoned a council of its kindred clouds. finally, the vapors welded themselves, as it were, into a mass, presenting the appearance of a pavement over which the wanderers might have trodden, but where they would vainly have sought an avenue to the blessed earth which they had lost. and the lovers yearned to behold that green earth again, more intensely, alas! than, beneath a clouded sky, they had ever desired a glimpse of heaven. they even felt it a relief to their desolation when the mists, creeping gradually up the mountain, concealed its lonely peak, and thus annihilated, at least for them, the whole region of visible space. but they drew closer together, with a fond and melancholy gaze, dreading lest the universal cloud should snatch them from each other's sight.still, perhaps, they would have been resolute to climb as far and as high, between earth and heaven, as they could find foothold, if hannah's strength had not begun to fail, and with that, her courage also. her breath grew short. she refused to burden her husband with her weight, but often tottered against his side, and recovered herself each time by a feebler effort. at last, she sank down on one of the rocky steps of the acclivity."we are lost, dear matthew," said she, mournfully. "we shall never find our way to the earth again. and oh how happy we might have been in our cottage!""dear heart!--we will yet be happy there," answered matthew. "look! in this direction, the sunshine penetrates the dismal mist. by its aid, i can direct our course to the passage of the notch. let us go back, love, and dream no more of the great carbuncle!""the sun cannot be yonder," said hannah, with despondence. "by this time it must be noon. if there could ever be any sunshine here, it would come from above our heads.""but look!" repeated matthew, in a somewhat altered tone. "it is brightening every moment. if not sunshine, what can it be?"nor could the young bride any longer deny that a radiance was breaking through the mist, and changing its dim hue to a dusky red, which continually grew more vivid, as if brilliant particles were interfused with the gloom. now, also, the cloud began to roll away from the mountain, while, as it heavily withdrew, one object after another started out of its impenetrable obscurity into sight, with precisely the effect of a new creation, before the indistinctness of the old chaos had been completely swallowed up. as the process went on, they saw the gleaming of water close at their feet, and found themselves on the very border of a mountain lake, deep, bright, clear, and calmly beautiful, spreading from brim to brim of a basin that had been scooped out of the solid rock. a ray of glory flashed across its surface. the pilgrims looked whence it should proceed, but closed their eyes with a thrill of awful admiration, to exclude the fervid splendor that glowed from the brow of a cliff impending over the enchanted lake. for the simple pair had reached that lake of mystery, and found the longsought shrine of the great carbuncle!they threw their arms around each other, and trembled at their own success; for, as the legends of this wondrous gem rushed thick upon their memory, they felt themselves marked out by fate--and the consciousness was fearful. often, from childhood upward, they had seen it shining like a distant star. and now that star was throwing its intensest lustre on their hearts. they seemed changed to one another's eyes, in the red brilliancy that flamed upon their cheeks, while it lent the same fire to the lake, the rocks, and sky, and to the mists which had rolled back before its power. but, with their next glance, they beheld an object that drew their attention even from the mighty stone. at the base of the cliff, directly beneath the great carbuncle, appeared the figure of a man, with his arms extended in the act of climbing, and his face turned upward, as if to drink the full gush of splendor. but he stirred not, no more than if changed to marble."it is the seeker," whispered hannah, convulsively grasping her husband's arm. "matthew, he is dead.""the joy of success has killed him," replied matthew, trembling violently. "or, perhaps, the very light of the great carbuncle was death!""the great carbuncle," cried a peevish voice behind them. "the great humbug! if you have found it, prithee point it out to me."they turned their heads, and there was the cynic, with his prodigious spectacles set carefully on his nose, staring now at the lake, now at the rocks, now at the distant masses of vapor, now right at the great carbuncle itself, yet seemingly as unconscious of its light as if all the scattered clouds were condensed about his person. though its radiance actually threw the shadow of the unbeliever at his own feet, as he turned his back upon the glorious jewel, he would not be convinced that there was the least glimmer there."where is your great humbug?" he repeated. "i challenge you to make me see it!""there," said matthew, incensed at such perverse blindness, and turning the cynic round towards the illuminated cliff. "take off those abominable spectacles, and you cannot help seeing it!"now these colored spectacles probably darkened the cynic's sight, in at least as great a degree as the smoked glasses through which people gaze at an eclipse. with resolute bravado, however, he snatched them from his nose, and fixed a bold stare full upon the ruddy blaze of the great carbuncle. but scarcely had he encountered it, when, with a deep, shuddering groan, he dropped his head, and pressed both hands across his miserable eyes. thenceforth there was, in very truth, no light of the great carbuncle, nor any other light on earth, nor light of heaven itself, for the poor cynic. so long accustomed to view all objects through a medium that deprived them of every glimpse of brightness, a single flash of so glorious a phenomenon, striking upon his naked vision, had blinded him forever."matthew," said hannah, clinging to him, "let us go hence!"matthew saw that she was faint, and kneeling down, supported her in his arms, while he threw some of the thrillingly cold water of the enchanted lake upon her face and bosom. it revived her, but could not renovate her courage."yes, dearest!" cried matthew, pressing her tremulous form to his breast,--"we will go hence, and return to our humble cottage. the blessed sunshine and the quiet moonlight shall come through our window. we will kindle the cheerful glow of our hearth, at eventide, and be happy in its light. but never again will we desire more light than all the world may share with us.""no," said his bride, "for how could we live by day, or sleep by night, in this awful blaze of the great carbuncle!"out of the hollow of their hands, they drank each a draught from the lake, which presented them its waters uncontaminated by an earthly lip. then, lending their guidance to the blinded cynic, who uttered not a word, and even stifled his groans in his own most wretched heart, they began to descend the mountain. yet, as they left the shore, till then untrodden, of the spirit's lake, they threw a farewell glance towards the cliff, and beheld the vapors gathering in dense volumes, through which the gem burned duskily.as touching the other pilgrims of the great carbuncle, the legend goes on to tell, that the worshipful master ichabod pigsnort soon gave up the quest as a desperate speculation, and wisely resolved to betake himself again to his warehouse, near the town dock, in boston. but, as he passed through the notch of the mountains, a war party of indians captured our unlucky merchant, and carried him to montreal, there holding him in bondage, till, by the payment of a heavy ransom, he had wofully subtracted from his hoard of pine-tree shillings. by his long absence, moreover, his affairs had become so disordered that, for the rest of his life, instead of wallowing in silver, he had seldom a sixpence worth of copper. doctor cacaphodel, the alchemist, returned to his laboratory with a prodigious fragment of granite, which he ground to powder, dissolved in acids, melted in the crucible, and burned with the blow-pipe, and published the result of his experiments in one of the heaviest folios of the day. and, for all these purposes, the gem itself could not have answered better than the granite. the poet, by a somewhat similar mistake, made prize of a great piece of ice, which he found in a sunless chasm of the mountains and swore that it corresponded, in all points, with his idea of the great carbuncle. the critics say, that, if his poetry lacked the splendor of the gem, it retained all the coldness of the ice. the lord de vere went back to his ancestral hall, where he contented himself with a wax-lighted chandelier, and filled, in due course of time, another coffin in the ancestral vault. as the funeral torches gleamed within that dark receptacle, there was no need of the great carbuncle to show the vanity of earthly pomp.the cynic, having cast aside his spectacles, wandered about the world a miserable object, and was punished with an agonizing desire of light, for the wilful blindness of his former life. the whole night long, he would lift his splendor-blasted orbs to the moon and stars; he turned his face eastward, at sunrise, as duly as a perisan idolater; he made a pilgrimage to rome, to witness the magnificent illumination of st. peter's church; and finally perished in the great fire of london, into the midst of which he had thrust himself, with the desperate idea of catching one feeble ray from the blaze that was kindling earth and heaven.matthew and his bride spent many peaceful years, and were fond of telling the legend of the great carbuncle. the tale, however, towards the close of their lengthened lives, did not meet with the full credence that had been accorded to it by those who remembered the ancient lustre of the gem. for it is affirmed that, from the hour when two mortals had shown themselves so simply wise as to reject a jewel which would have dimmed all earthly things, its splendor waned. when other pilgrims reached the cliff, they found only an opaque stone, with particles of mica glittering on its surface. there is also a tradition that, as the youthful pair departed, the gem was loosened from the forehead of the cliff, and fell into the enchanted lake, and that, at noontide, the seeker's form may still be seen to bend over its quenchless gleam.some few believe that this inestimable stone is blazing as of old, and say that they have caught its radiance, like a flash of summer lightning, far down the valley of the saco. and be it owned that, many a mile from the crystal hills, i saw a wondrous light around their summits, and was lured, by the faith of poesy, to be the latest pilgrim of the great carbuncle.a parablethe sexton stood in the porch of milford meetinghouse, pulling busily at the bell rope. the old people of the village came stooping along the street. children, with bright faces, tripped merrily beside their parents, or mimicked a graver gait, in the conscious dignity of their sunday clothes. spruce bachelors looked sidelong at the pretty maidens, and fancied that the sabbath sunshine made them prettier than on weekdays. when the throng had mostly streamed into the porch, the sexton began to toll the bell, keeping his eye on the reverend mr. hooper's door. the first glimpse of the clergyman's figure was the signal for the bell to cease its summons."but what has good parson hooper got upon his face?" cried the sexton in astonishment.all within hearing immediately turned about, and beheld the semblance of mr. hooper, pacing slowly his meditative way toward the meetinghouse. with one accord they started, expressing more wonder than if some strange minister were coming to dust the cushions of mr. hooper's pulpit."are you sure it is our parson?" inquired goodman gray of the sexton."of a certainty it is good mr. hooper," replied the sexton. "he was to have exchanged pulpits with parson shute, of westbury; but parson shute sent to excuse himself yesterday, being to preach a funeral sermon."the cause of so much amazement may appear sufficiently slight. mr. hooper gentlemanly person, of about thirty, though still a bachelor, was dressed with due clerical neatness, as if a careful wife had starched his band, and brushed the weekly dust from his sunday's garb. there was but one thing remarkable in his appearance. swathed about his forehead, and hanging down over his face, so low as to be shaken by his breath mr. hooper had on a black veil. on a nearer view it seemed to consist of two folds of crepe, which entirely concealed his features, except the mouth and chin, but probably did not intercept his sight, further than to give a darkened aspect to all living and inanimate things. with this gloomy shade before him, goad mr. hooper walked onward, at a slow and quiet pace, stooping somewhat, and looking on the ground, as is customary with abstracted men, yet nodding kindly to those of his parishioners who still waited on the meetinghouse steps. but so wonderstruck were they that his greeting hardly met with a return."i can't really feel as if good mr. hooper's face was behind that piece of crape," said the sexton."i don't like it," muttered an old woman, as she hobbled into the meetinghouse. "he has changed himself into something awful, only by hiding his face.""our parson has gone mad!" cried goodman gray, following him across the threshold.a rumor of some unaccountable phenomenon had preceded mr. hooper into the meetinghouse, and set all the congregation astir. few could refrain from twisting their heads toward the door; many stood upright, and turned directly about while several little boys clambered upon the seats, and came down again with a terrible racket. there was a general bustle, a rustling of the women's gowns and shuffling of the men's feet, greatly at variance with that hushed repose which should attend the entrance of the minister. but mr. hooper appeared not to notice the perturbation of his people. he entered with an almost noiseless step, bent his head mildly to the pews on each side, and bowed as he passed his oldest parishioner, a whitehaired great-grandsire, who occupied an armchair in the center of the aisle. it was strange to observe how slowly this venerable man became conscious of something singular in the appearance of his pastor. he seemed not fully to partake of the prevailing wonder, till mr. hooper had ascended the stairs, and showed himself in the pulpit, face to face with his congregation, except for the black veil. that mysterious emblem was never once withdrawn. it shook with his measured breath, as he gave out the psalm; it threw its obscurity between him and the holy page, as he read the scriptures; and while he prayed, the veil lay heavily on his uplifted countenance. did he seek to hide it from the dread being whom he was addressing?such was the effect of this simple piece of crepe, that more than one woman of delicate nerves was forced to leave the meetinghouse. yet perhaps the pale-faced congregation was almost as fearful a sight to the minister, as his black veil to them.mr. hooper had the reputation of a good preacher, but not an energetic one; he strove to win his people heavenward by mild, persuasive influences, rather than to drive them thither by the thunders of the word. the sermon which he now delivered was marked by the same characteristics of style and manner as the general series of his pulpit oratory. but there was something, either in the sentiment of the discourse itself, or in the imagination of the auditors, which made it greatly the most powerful effort that they had ever heard from their pastor's lips. it was tinged, rather more darkly than usual, with the gentle gloom of mr. hooper's temperament. the subject had reference to secret sit, and those sad mysteries which we hide from our nearest and dearest and would fain conceal from our own consciousness, even forgetting that the omniscient can de tect them. a subtle power was breathed into his words. each member of the congregation, the most innocent girl, and the man of hardened breast, felt as if the preacher had crept upon them, behind his awful veil, and discovered their hoarded iniquity of deed or thought. many spread their clasped hands on their bosoms. there was nothing terrible in what mr. hooper said, at least no violence; and yet, with every tremor of his melancholy voice, the hearers quaked. an unsought pathos came hand in hand with awe. so sensible were the audience of some unwonted attribute in their minister, that they longed for a breath of wind to blow aside the veil, almost believing that a stranger's visage would be discovered, though the form, gesture, and voice were those of mr. hooper.at the close of the services, the people hurried out with indecorous confusion, eager to communicate their pent-up amazement, and conscious of lighter spirits the  moment they lost sight of the black veil. some gathered in little circles, huddled closely together, with their mouths all whispering in the center; some went homeward alone, wrapt in silent meditation; some talked loudly, and profaned the sabbath day with ostentatious laughter. a few shook, their sagacious heads, intimating that they could penetrate the mystery; while one or two affirmed that there was no mystery at all, but only that mr. hooper's eyes were so weakened by the midnight lamp as to require a shade. after a brief interval, forth came good mr. hooper also, in the rear of his flock. turning his veiled face from one group to another, he paid due reverence to the hoary heads, saluted the middle-aged with kind dignity as their friend and spiritual guide, greeted the young with mingled authority and love, and laid his hands on the little children's heads to bless them. such was always his custom on the sabbath day. strange and bewildered looks repaid him for his courtesy. none, as on former occasions, aspired to the honor of walking by their pastor's side. old squire saunders, doubtless by an accidental lapse of memory, neglected to invite mr. hooper to his table, where the good clergyman had been wont to bless the food, almost every sunday since his settlement. he returned, therefore, to the parsonage, and, at the moment of closing the door, was observed to look back upon the people, all of whom had their eyes fixed upon the minister. a sad smile gleamed faintly from beneath the black veil, and flickered about his mouth, glimmering as he disappeared."how strange," said a lady, "that a simple black veil, such as any woman might wear on her bonnet, should become such a terrible thing on mr. hooper's face.""something must surely be amiss with  hooper's intellects," observed her husband, the physician of the village. "but the strangest part of the affair is the effect of this vagary, even on a sober-minded man like myself. the black veil, though it covers only our pastor's face, throws its influence over his whole person, and makes him ghostlike from head to foot. do you not feel it so?""truly do i," replied the lady; "and i would not be alone with him for the world. i wonder he is not afraid to be alone with himself!""men sometimes are so," said her husband.the afternoon service was attended with similar circumstances. at its conclusion, the bell tolled for the funeral of a young lady. the relatives and friends were assembled in the house, and the more distant acquaintances stood about the door, speaking of the good qualities of the deceased, when their talk was interrupted by the appearance of mr. hooper, still covered with his black veil. it was now an appropriate emblem. the clergyman stepped into the room where the corpse was laid, and bent over the coffin, to take a last farewell of his deceased parishioner. as he stooped, the veil hung straight down from his forehead, so that, if her eyelids had not been dosed forever, the dead maiden might have seen his face. could mr. hooper be fearful of her glance, that he so hastily caught back the black veil? a person who watched the interview between the dead and the living scrupled not to affirm, that, at the instant when the clergyman's features were disclosed, the corpse had slightly shuddered, rustling the shroud and muslin cap, though the countenance retained the composure of death. a superstitious old woman was the only witness of this prodigy. from the coffin mr. hooper passed into the chamber of the mourners, and thence to the head of the staircase, to make the funeral prayer. it was a tender and heart-dissolving prayer, full of sorrow, yet so imbued with celestial hopes, that the music of a heavenly harp, swept by the fingers of the dead, seemed faintly to be heard among the saddest accents of the minister. the people trembled, though they but darkly understood him when he prayed that they, and himself, and all of mortal race, might be ready, as he trusted this young maiden had been, for the dreadful hour that should snatch the veil from their faces. the bearers went heavily forth, and the mourners followed, saddening all the street, with the dead before them, and mr. hooper in his black veil behind."why do- you look back?" said one in the procession to his partner. "i had a fancy," replied she, "that the minister and the maiden's spirit were walking hand in hand.""and so had i, at the same moment," said the other.that night, the handsomest couple in milford village were to be joined in wedlock. though reckoned a melancholy man, mr. hooper had a placid cheerfulness for such occasions, which often excited a sympathetic smile where livelier merriment would have been thrown away. there was no quality of his disposition which made him more beloved than this. the company at the wedding awaited his arrival with impatience, trusting that the strange awe, which had gathered over him throughout the day, would now be dispelled. but such was not the result. when mr. hooper came, the first thing that their eyes rested on was the same horrible black veil, which had added deeper gloom to the funeral, and could portend nothing but evil to the wedding. such was its immediate effect on the guests that a cloud seemed to have rolled duskily from beneath the black crepe, and dimmed the light of the candles. the bridal pair stood up before the minister. but the bride's cold fingers quivered in the tremulous hand of the bridegroom, and her deathlike paleness caused a whisper that the maiden who had been buried a few hours before was come from her grave to be married. if ever another wedding were so dismal, it was that famous one where they tolled the wedding knell. after performing the ceremony, mr. hooper raised a glass of wine to his lips, wishing happiness to the new-married couple in a strain of mild pleasantry that ought to have brightened the features of the guests, like a cheerful gleam from the hearth. at that instant, catching a glimpse of his figure in the looking glass, the black veil involved his own spirit in the horror with which it overwhelmed all others. his frame shuddered his lips grew white, he spilt the untasted wine upon the carpet, and rushed forth into the darkness. for the earth, too, had on her black veil.the next day, the whole village of milford talked of little else than parson hooper's black veil. that, and the mystery concealed behind it, supplied a topic for discussion between acquaintances meeting in the street, and good women gossiping at their open windows. it was the first item of news that the tavernkeeper told to his guests. the children babbled of it on their way to school. one imitative little imp covered his face with an old black handkerchief, thereby so affrighting his playmates that the panic seized himself, and he well-nigh lost his wits by his own waggery.it was remarkable that of all the busybodies and impertinent people in the parish, not one ventured to put the plain question to mr. hooper, wherefore he did this thing. hitherto, whenever there appeared the slightest call for such interference, he had never lacked advisers, nor shown himself averse to be guided by their judgment. if he erred at all, it was by so painful a degree of self-distrust, that even the mildest censure would lead him to consider an indifferent action as a crime. yet, though so well acquainted with this amiable weakness, no individual among his parishioners chose to make the black veil a subject of friendly remonstrance. there was a feeling of dread, neither plainly confessed nor carefully concealed, which caused each to shift the responsibility upon another, till at length it was found expedient to send a deputation of the church, in order to deal with mr. hooper about the mystery, before it should grow into a scandal. never did an embassy so ill discharge its duties. the minister received them with friendly courtesy, but remained silent, after they were seated, leaving to his visitors the whole burden of introducing their important business. the topic, it might be supposed, was obvious enough. there was the black veil swathed round mr. hooper's forehead, and concealing every feature above his placid mouth, on which, at times, they could perceive the glimmering of a melancholy smile. but that piece of crepe, to their imagination, seemed to hang down before his heart, the symbol of a fearful secret between him and them. were the veil but cast aside, they might speak freely of it, but not till then. thus they sat a considerable time, speechless, confused, and shrinking uneasily from mr. hooper's eye, which they felt to be fixed upon them with an invisible glance. finally, the deputies returned abashed to their constituents, pronouncing the matter too weighty to be handled, except by a council of the churches, if, indeed, it might not require a general synod.but there was one person in the village unappalled by the awe with which the black veil had impressed all besides herself. when the deputies returned without an explanation, or even venturing to demand one, she, with the calm energy of her character, determined to chase away the strange cloud that appeared to be settling round mr. hooper, every moment more darkly than before. as his plighted wife, it should be her privilege to know what the black veil concealed. at the minister's first visit, therefore, she entered upon the subject with a direct simplicity, which made the task easier both for him and her, after he had seated himself, she fixed her eyes steadfastly upon the veil, but could discern nothing of the dreadful gloom that had so overawed the multitude; it was but a double fold of crepe, hanging down from his forehead to his mouth, and slightly stirring with his breath."no," said she aloud, and smiling, "there is nothing terrible in this piece of crepe, except that it hides a face which i am always glad to look upon. come, good sir, let the sun shine from behind the cloud. first lay aside your black veil; then tell me why you put it on."mr. hooper's smile glimmered faintly."there is an hour to come," said he, "when all of us shall cast aside our veils. take it not amiss, beloved friend, if i wear this piece of crepe till then.""your words are a mystery, too," returned the young lady. "take away the veil from them, at least.""elizabeth, i will," said he, "so far as my vow may suffer me. know, then, this veil is a type and a symbol, and i am bound to wear it ever, both in light and darkness, in solitude and before the gaze of multitudes, and as with strangers, so with my familiar friends. no mortal eye will see it withdrawn. this dismal shade must separate me from the world; even you, elizabeth, can never come behind it!""what grievous affliction hath befallen you," she earnestly inquired, "that you should thus darken your eyes forever?""if it be a sign of mourning," replied mr. hooper, "i, perhaps, like. most other mortals, have sorrows dark enough to be typified by a black veil.""but what if the world will not believe that it is the type of an innocent sorrow?" urged elizabeth. "beloved and respected: as you are, there may be whispers that you hide your face under the consciousness of secret sin. for the sake of your holy office, do away this scandal!"the color rose into her cheeks as she intimated the nature of the rumors that were already abroad in the village. but mr. hooper's mildness did not forsake him. he even smiled again--that same sad smile, which always appeared like a faint glimmering of light, proceeding from the obscurity beneath the veil."if i hide my face for sorrow, there is cause enough;" he merely replied; "and if i cover it for secret sin, what mortal might not do the same?"and with this gentle, but unconquerable obstinacy did he resist her entreaties. at length elizabeth sat silent. for a few momeets she appeared lost in thought, considering, probably, what new methods might be tried to withdraw her foyer from so dark a fantasy, which, if it had no other meaning, was perhaps a symptom of mental disease. though of a firmer character than his own, the tears rolled down her cheeks. but, in an instant, as it were, a new feeling took the place of sorrow; her eyes were fixed insensibly on the black veil, when, like a sudden twilight in the air, its terrors: fell around her. she arose, and stood trembling before him."and do you feel it then, at last?" said he, mournfully.she made no reply, but covered her eyes with her hand, and turned to leave the room. he rushed forward and caught her arm."have patience with me, elizabeth!" cried he, passionately. "do not desert me, though this veil must be between us here on earth. be mine, and hereafter there shall be no veil over my face, no darkness between our souls! it is but a mortal veil--it is not for eternity! o! you know not how lonely i am, and how frightened, to be alone behind my black veil. do not leave me in this miserable obscurity forever!""lift the veil but once, and look me in the face," said she."never! it cannot be!" replied mr. hooper."then farewell!" said elizabeth.she withdrew her arm from his grasp, and slowly departed, pausing at the door, to give one long shuddering gaze, that seemed almost to penetrate the mystery of the black veil. but, even amid his grief, mr. hooper smiled to think that only a material emblem had separated him from happiness, though the horrors which it shadowed forth must be drawn darkly between the fondest of lovers.from that time no attempts were made to remove mr. hooper's black veil, or, by a direct appeal, to discover the secret which it was supposed to hide. by persons who claimed a superiority to popular prejudice, it was reckoned more an eccentric whim, such as often mingles with the sober actions of men otherwise rational, and tinges them all with its own semblance of insanity. but with the multitude, good mr. hooper was irreparably a bugbear. he could not walk the street with any peace of mind, so conscious was he that the gentle and timid would turn aside to avoid him, and that others would make it a point of hardihood to throw themselves in his way. the impertinence of the latter class compelled him to give up his customary walk at sunset to the burial ground; for when he leaned pensively over the gate, there would always be faces behind the gravestones, peeping at his black veil. a fable went the rounds that the stare of the dead people drove him thence. it grieved him, to the very depth of his kind heart, to observe how the children fled from his approach, breaking up their merriest sports, while his melancholy figure was yet afar off. their instinctive dread caused him to feel more strongly than aught else that a preternatural horror was interwoven with l the threads of the black crape. in truth, his own antipathy to the veil was known to be l so great, that he never willingly passed before a mirror, nor stooped to drink at a still fountain, lest, in its peaceful bosom, he should be affrighted by himself. this was what gave plausibility to the whispers, that mr. hooper's conscience tortured him for some great crime too horrible to be entirely concealed, or. otherwise than so obscurely intimated. thus, from beneath the black veil, there rolled a cloud into the sunshine, an ambiguity of sin or sorrow, which enveloped the poor minister, so that love or sympathy could never reach him. it was said that ghost and fiend consorted with him there. with self-shudderings and outward terrors, he walked continually in its l shadow, groping darkly within his own soul, or gazing through a medium that saddened the whole world. even the lawless wind, it was believed, respected his dreadful secret, and never blew aside the veil. but still good mr. hooper sadly smiled at the pale visages of the worldly throng as he passed by.among all its bad influences, the black veil had the one desirable effect, of making its wearer a very efficient clergyman. by the aid of his mysterious emblem--for there was no other apparent cause--he became a man of awful power over souls that were in agony of sin. his converts always regarded him with a dread peculiar to themselves, affirming, though but figuratively, that, before he brought them to celestial light, they had been with him behind the black veil. its gloom, indeed, enabled him to sympathize with all dark affections. dying sinners cried aloud for mr. hooper, and would not yield their breath till he appeared; though ever, as he stooped to whisper consolation, they shuddered at the veiled face so near their own. such were the terrors of the black veil, even when death had bared his visage! strangers came long distances to attend service at his church, with the mere idle purpose of gazing at his figure, because it was forbidden them to behold his face. but many were made to quake ere they departed! once, during governor belcher's administration, mr. hooper was appointed to preach the election sermon. covered with his black veil, he stood before the chief magistrate, the council, and the representatives, and wrought so deep an impression, that the legislative measures of that year were characterized by all the gloom and piety of our earliest ancestral sway.in this manner mr. hooper spent a long life, irreproachable in outward act, yet shrouded in dismal suspicions; kind and loving, though unloved, and dimly feared; a man apart from men, shunned in their health and joy, but ever summoned to their aid in mortal anguish. as years wore on, shedding their snows above his sable veil, he acquired a name throughout the new england churches, and they called him father hooper. nearly all his parishioners, who were of mature age when he was settled, had been borne away by many a funeral; he had one congregation in the church, and a more crowded one in the churchyard; and having wrought so late into the evening, and done his work so well, it was now good father hooper's turn to rest.several persons were visible by the shaded candlelight, in the death chamber of the old clergyman. natural connections he had none. but there was the decorously grave, though unmoved physician, seeking only to mitigate the last pangs of the patient whom he could not save. there were the deacons, and other eminently pious members of his church. there, also, was the reverend mr. clark, of westbury, a young and zealous divine, who had ridden in haste to pray by the bedside of the expiring minister. there was the nurse, no hired handmaiden of death, but one whose calm affection had endured thus long in secrecy, in solitude, amid the chill of age, and would not perish, even at the dying hour. who, but elizabeth! and there lay the hoary head of good father hooper upon the death pillow, with the black veil still swathed about his brow, and reaching down over his face, so that each more difficult gasp of his faint breath caused it to stir. all through life that piece of crepe had hung between him and the world; it had separated him from cheerful brotherhood and woman's love, arid kept him in that saddest of all prisons, his own heart; and still it lay upon his face, as if to deepen the gloom of his darksome chamber, and shade him from the sunshine of eternity.for some time previous, his mind had been confused, wavering doubtfully between the past and the present, and hovering forward, as it were, at intervals, into the indistinctness of the world to come. there had been feverish turns, which tossed him from side to side, and wore away what little strength he had. but in his most convulsive struggles, and in the wildest vagaries of his intellect, when no other thought retained its sober influence, he still showed an awful solicitude lest the black veil should slip aside. even if his bewildered soul could have forgotten, there was a faithful woman at his pillow, who, with averted eyes, would have covered that aged face, which she had last beheld in the comeliness of manhood. at length the deathstricken old man lay quietly in the torpor of mental and bodily exhaustion, with an imperceptible pulse, and breath that grew fainter and fainter, except when a long, deep, and irregular inspiration seemed to prelude the flight of his spirit.the minister of westbury approached the bedside."venerable father hooper," said he, "the moment of your release is at hand. are you ready for the lifting of the veil that shuts in time from eternity?"  father hooper at first replied merely by a feeble motion of his head; then, apprehensive, perhaps, that his meaning might be doubtful, he exerted himself to speak."yea," said he, in faint accents, "my soul hath a patient weariness until that veil be lifted.""and is it fitting," resumed the reverend mr. clark, "that a man so given to prayer, of such a blameless example, holy in deed and thought, so far as mortal judgment may pronounce; is it fitting that a father in the church should leave a shadow on his memory, that may seem to blacken a life so pure? i pray you, my venerable brother, let not this thing be! suffer us to be gladdened by your triumphant aspect as you go to your reward. before the veil of eternity be lifted, let me cast aside this black veil from your face!"and thus speaking the reverend mr. clark bent forward to reveal the mystery of so many years. but, exerting a sudden energy, that made all the beholders stand aghast, father hooper snatched both his hands from beneath the bedclothes, and pressed them strongly on the black veil, resolute to struggle, if the minister of westbury would contend with a dying man."never!" cried the veiled clergyman. "on earth, never!""dark old men!" exclaimed the affrighted minister, "with what horrible crime upon your soul are you now passing to the judgment?"father hooper's breath heaved; it rattled in his throat; but, with a mighty effort, grasping forward with his hands, he caught hold of life, and held it back till he should speak, he even raised himself in bed; and there he sat, shivering with the arms of death around him, while the black veil hung down, awful, at that last moment, in the gathered terrors of a lifetime. and yet the faint, sad smile, so often there, now seemed to glimmer from its obscurity, and linger on father hooper's lips."why do you tremble at me alone?" cried he, turning his veiled face round the circle of pale spectators. "tremble also at each others have men avoided me, and women shown no pity, and children screamed and fled, only for my black veil? what, but the mystery which it obscurely typifies, has made this piece of crepe so awful? when the friend shows his inmost heart to his friend; the lover to his best beloved; when man does not vainly shrink from the eye of his creator, loathsomely treasuring up the secret of his sin; then deem me a monster, for the symbol beneath which i have lived, and die! i look around me, and, lo! on every visage a black veil."while his auditors shrank from one another, in mutual affright, father hooper fell back upon his pillow, a veiled corpse, with a faint smile lingering on the lips. still veiled, they laid him in his coffin, and a veiled corpse they bore. him to the grave. the grass of many years has sprung up and withered on that grave, the burial stone is moss-grown, and good mr. hooper's face is dust; but awful is still the thought that it moldered beneath the black veil!we do not remember to have seen any translated specimens of the productions of m. de l'aubepine--a fact the less to be wondered at, as his very name is unknown to many of his own countrymen as well as to the student of foreign literature. as a writer, he seems to occupy an unfortunate position between the transcendentalists (who, under one name or another, have their share in all the current literature of the world) and the great body of pen-and-ink men who address the intellect and sympathies of the multitude. if not too refined, at all events too remote, too shadowy, and unsubstantial in his modes of development to suit the taste of the latter class, and yet too popular to satisfy the spiritual or metaphysical requisitions of the former, he must necessarily find himself without an audience, except here and there an individual or possibly an isolated clique. his writings, to do them justice, are not altogether destitute of fancy and originality; they might have won him greater reputation but for an inveterate love of allegory, which is apt to invest his plots and characters with the aspect of scenery and people in the clouds, and to steal away the human warmth out of his conceptions. his fictions are sometimes historical, sometimes of the present day, and sometimes, so far as can be discovered, have little or no reference either to time or space. in any case, he generally contents himself with a very slight embroidery of outward manners,--the faintest possible counterfeit of real life,--and endeavors to create an interest by some less obvious peculiarity of the subject. occasionally a breath of nature, a raindrop of pathos and tenderness, or a gleam of humor, will find its way into the midst of his fantastic imagery, and make us feel as if, after all, we were yet within the limits of our native earth. we will only add to this very cursory notice that m. de l'aubepine's productions, if the reader chance to take them in precisely the proper point of view, may amuse a leisure hour as well as those of a brighter man; if otherwise, they can hardly fail to look excessively like nonsense.our author is voluminous; he continues to write and publish with as much praiseworthy and indefatigable prolixity as if his efforts were crowned with the brilliant success that so justly attends those of eugene sue. his first appearance was by a collection of stories in a long series of volumes entitled "contes deux fois racontees." the titles of some of his more recent works (we quote from memory) are as follows: "le voyage celeste a chemin de fer," 3 tom., 1838; "le nouveau pere adam et la nouvelle mere eve," 2 tom., 1839; "roderic; ou le serpent a l'estomac," 2 tom., 1840; "le culte du feu," a folio volume of ponderous research into the religion and ritual of the old persian ghebers, published in 1841; "la soiree du chateau en espagne," 1 tom., 8vo, 1842; and "l'artiste du beau; ou le papillon mecanique," 5 tom., 4to, 1843. our somewhat wearisome perusal of this startling catalogue of volumes has left behind it a certain personal affection and sympathy, though by no means admiration, for m. de l'aubepine; and we would fain do the little in our power towards introducing him favorably to the american public. the ensuing tale is a translation of his "beatrice; ou la belle empoisonneuse," recently published in "la revue anti-aristocratique." this journal, edited by the comte de bearhaven, has for some years past led the defence of liberal principles and popular rights with a faithfulness and ability worthy of all praise.a young man, named giovanni guasconti, came, very long ago, from the more southern region of italy, to pursue his studies at the university of padua. giovanni, who had but a scanty supply of gold ducats in his pocket, took lodgings in a high and gloomy chamber of an old edifice which looked not unworthy to have been the palace of a paduan noble, and which, in fact, exhibited over its entrance the armorial bearings of a family long since extinct. the young stranger, who was not unstudied in the great poem of his country, recollected that one of the ancestors of this family, and perhaps an occupant of this very mansion, had been pictured by dante as a partaker of the immortal agonies of his inferno. these reminiscences and associations, together with the tendency to heartbreak natural to a young man for the first time out of his native sphere, caused giovanni to sigh heavily as he looked around the desolate and ill-furnished apartment."holy virgin, signor!" cried old dame lisabetta, who, won by the youth's remarkable beauty of person, was kindly endeavoring to give the chamber a habitable air, "what a sigh was that to come out of a young man's heart! do you find this old mansion gloomy? for the love of heaven, then, put your head out of the window, and you will see as bright sunshine as you have left in naples."guasconti mechanically did as the old woman advised, but could not quite agree with her that the paduan sunshine was as cheerful as that of southern italy. such as it was, however, it fell upon a garden beneath the window and expended its fostering influences on a variety of plants, which seemed to have been cultivated with exceeding care."does this garden belong to the house?" asked giovanni."heaven forbid, signor, unless it were fruitful of better pot herbs than any that grow there now," answered old lisabetta. "no; that garden is cultivated by the own hands of signor giacomo rappaccini, the famous doctor, who, i warrant him, has been heard of as far as naples. it is said that he distils these plants into medicines that are as potent as a charm. oftentimes you may see the signor doctor at work, and perchance the signora, his daughter, too, gathering the strange flowers that grow in the garden."the old woman had now done what she could for the aspect of the chamber; and, commending the young man to the protection of the saints, took her departure.giovanni still found no better occupation than to look down into the garden beneath his window. from its appearance, he judged it to be one of those botanic gardens which were of earlier date in padua than elsewhere in italy or in the world. or, not improbably, it might once have been the pleasure-place of an opulent family; for there was the ruin of a marble fountain in the centre, sculptured with rare art, but so wofully shattered that it was impossible to trace the original design from the chaos of remaining fragments. the water, however, continued to gush and sparkle into the sunbeams as cheerfully as ever. a little gurgling sound ascended to the young man's window, and made him feel as if the fountain were an immortal spirit that sung its song unceasingly and without heeding the vicissitudes around it, while one century imbodied it in marble and another scattered the perishable garniture on the soil. all about the pool into which the water subsided grew various plants, that seemed to require a plentiful supply of moisture for the nourishment of gigantic leaves, and in some instances, flowers gorgeously magnificent. there was one shrub in particular, set in a marble vase in the midst of the pool, that bore a profusion of purple blossoms, each of which had the lustre and richness of a gem; and the whole together made a show so resplendent that it seemed enough to illuminate the garden, even had there been no sunshine. every portion of the soil was peopled with plants and herbs, which, if less beautiful, still bore tokens of assiduous care, as if all had their individual virtues, known to the scientific mind that fostered them. some were placed in urns, rich with old carving, and others in common garden pots; some crept serpent-like along the ground or climbed on high, using whatever means of ascent was offered them. one plant had wreathed itself round a statue of vertumnus, which was thus quite veiled and shrouded in a drapery of hanging foliage, so happily arranged that it might have served a sculptor for a study.while giovanni stood at the window he heard a rustling behind a screen of leaves, and became aware that a person was at work in the garden. his figure soon emerged into view, and showed itself to be that of no common laborer, but a tall, emaciated, sallow, and sickly-looking man, dressed in a scholar's garb of black. he was beyond the middle term of life, with gray hair, a thin, gray beard, and a face singularly marked with intellect and cultivation, but which could never, even in his more youthful days, have expressed much warmth of heart.nothing could exceed the intentness with which this scientific gardener examined every shrub which grew in his path: it seemed as if he was looking into their inmost nature, making observations in regard to their creative essence, and discovering why one leaf grew in this shape and another in that, and wherefore such and such flowers differed among themselves in hue and perfume. nevertheless, in spite of this deep intelligence on his part, there was no approach to intimacy between himself and these vegetable existences. on the contrary, he avoided their actual touch or the direct inhaling of their odors with a caution that impressed giovanni most disagreeably; for the man's demeanor was that of one walking among malignant influences, such as savage beasts, or deadly snakes, or evil spirits, which, should he allow them one moment of license, would wreak upon him some terrible fatality. it was strangely frightful to the young man's imagination to see this air of insecurity in a person cultivating a garden, that most simple and innocent of human toils, and which had been alike the joy and labor of the unfallen parents of the race. was this garden, then, the eden of the present world? and this man, with such a perception of harm in what his own hands caused to grow,--was he the adam?the distrustful gardener, while plucking away the dead leaves or pruning the too luxuriant growth of the shrubs, defended his hands with a pair of thick gloves. nor were these his only armor. when, in his walk through the garden, he came to the magnificent plant that hung its purple gems beside the marble fountain, he placed a kind of mask over his mouth and nostrils, as if all this beauty did but conceal a deadlier malice; but, finding his task still too dangerous, he drew back, removed the mask, and called loudly, but in the infirm voice of a person affected with inward disease, "beatrice! beatrice!""here am i, my father. what would you?" cried a rich and youthful voice from the window of the opposite house--a voice as rich as a tropical sunset, and which made giovanni, though he knew not why, think of deep hues of purple or crimson and of perfumes heavily delectable. "are you in the garden?""yes, beatrice," answered the gardener, "and i need your help."soon there emerged from under a sculptured portal the figure of a young girl, arrayed with as much richness of taste as the most splendid of the flowers, beautiful as the day, and with a bloom so deep and vivid that one shade more would have been too much. she looked redundant with life, health, and energy; all of which attributes were bound down and compressed, as it were and girdled tensely, in their luxuriance, by her virgin zone. yet giovanni's fancy must have grown morbid while he looked down into the garden; for the impression which the fair stranger made upon him was as if here were another flower, the human sister of those vegetable ones, as beautiful as they, more beautiful than the richest of them, but still to be touched only with a glove, nor to be approached without a mask. as beatrice came down the garden path, it was observable that she handled and inhaled the odor of several of the plants which her father had most sedulously avoided."here, beatrice," said the latter, "see how many needful offices require to be done to our chief treasure. yet, shattered as i am, my life might pay the penalty of approaching it so closely as circumstances demand. henceforth, i fear, this plant must be consigned to your sole charge.""and gladly will i undertake it," cried again the rich tones of the young lady, as she bent towards the magnificent plant and opened her arms as if to embrace it. "yes, my sister, my splendour, it shall be beatrice's task to nurse and serve thee; and thou shalt reward her with thy kisses and perfumed breath, which to her is as the breath of life."then, with all the tenderness in her manner that was so strikingly expressed in her words, she busied herself with such attentions as the plant seemed to require; and giovanni, at his lofty window, rubbed his eyes and almost doubted whether it were a girl tending her favorite flower, or one sister performing the duties of affection to another. the scene soon terminated. whether dr. rappaccini had finished his labors in the garden, or that his watchful eye had caught the stranger's face, he now took his daughter's arm and retired. night was already closing in; oppressive exhalations seemed to proceed from the plants and steal upward past the open window; and giovanni, closing the lattice, went to his couch and dreamed of a rich flower and beautiful girl. flower and maiden were different, and yet the same, and fraught with some strange peril in either shape.but there is an influence in the light of morning that tends to rectify whatever errors of fancy, or even of judgment, we may have incurred during the sun's decline, or among the shadows of the night, or in the less wholesome glow of moonshine. giovanni's first movement, on starting from sleep, was to throw open the window and gaze down into the garden which his dreams had made so fertile of mysteries. he was surprised and a little ashamed to find how real and matter-of-fact an affair it proved to be, in the first rays of the sun which gilded the dew-drops that hung upon leaf and blossom, and, while giving a brighter beauty to each rare flower, brought everything within the limits of ordinary experience. the young man rejoiced that, in the heart of the barren city, he had the privilege of overlooking this spot of lovely and luxuriant vegetation. it would serve, he said to himself, as a symbolic language to keep him in communion with nature. neither the sickly and thoughtworn dr. giacomo rappaccini, it is true, nor his brilliant daughter, were now visible; so that giovanni could not determine how much of the singularity which he attributed to both was due to their own qualities and how much to his wonder-working fancy; but he was inclined to take a most rational view of the whole matter.in the course of the day he paid his respects to signor pietro baglioni, professor of medicine in the university, a physician of eminent repute to whom giovanni had brought a letter of introduction. the professor was an elderly personage, apparently of genial nature, and habits that might almost be called jovial. he kept the young man to dinner, and made himself very agreeable by the freedom and liveliness of his conversation, especially when warmed by a flask or two of tuscan wine. giovanni, conceiving that men of science, inhabitants of the same city, must needs be on familiar terms with one another, took an opportunity to mention the name of dr. rappaccini. but the professor did not respond with so much cordiality as he had anticipated."ill would it become a teacher of the divine art of medicine," said professor pietro baglioni, in answer to a question of giovanni, "to withhold due and well-considered praise of a physician so eminently skilled as rappaccini; but, on the other hand, i should answer it but scantily to my conscience were i to permit a worthy youth like yourself, signor giovanni, the son of an ancient friend, to imbibe erroneous ideas respecting a man who might hereafter chance to hold your life and death in his hands. the truth is, our worshipful dr. rappaccini has as much science as any member of the faculty--with perhaps one single exception--in padua, or all italy; but there are certain grave objections to his professional character.""and what are they?" asked the young man."has my friend giovanni any disease of body or heart, that he is so inquisitive about physicians?" said the professor, with a smile. "but as for rappaccini, it is said of him--and i, who know the man well, can answer for its truth--that he cares infinitely more for science than for mankind. his patients are interesting to him only as subjects for some new experiment. he would sacrifice human life, his own among the rest, or whatever else was dearest to him, for the sake of adding so much as a grain of mustard seed to the great heap of his accumulated knowledge.""methinks he is an awful man indeed," remarked guasconti, mentally recalling the cold and purely intellectual aspect of rappaccini. "and yet, worshipful professor, is it not a noble spirit? are there many men capable of so spiritual a love of science?""god forbid," answered the professor, somewhat testily; "at least, unless they take sounder views of the healing art than those adopted by rappaccini. it is his theory that all medicinal virtues are comprised within those substances which we term vegetable poisons. these he cultivates with his own hands, and is said even to have produced new varieties of poison, more horribly deleterious than nature, without the assistance of this learned person, would ever have plagued the world withal. that the signor doctor does less mischief than might be expected with such dangerous substances is undeniable. now and then, it must be owned, he has effected, or seemed to effect, a marvellous cure; but, to tell you my private mind, signor giovanni, he should receive little credit for such instances of success,--they being probably the work of chance, --but should be held strictly accountable for his failures, which may justly be considered his own work."the youth might have taken baglioni's opinions with many grains of allowance had he known that there was a professional warfare of long continuance between him and dr. rappaccini, in which the latter was generally thought to have gained the advantage. if the reader be inclined to judge for himself, we refer him to certain black-letter tracts on both sides, preserved in the medical department of the university of padua."i know not, most learned professor," returned giovanni, after musing on what had been said of rappaccini's exclusive zeal for science,--"i know not how dearly this physician may love his art; but surely there is one object more dear to him. he has a daughter.""aha!" cried the professor, with a laugh. "so now our friend giovanni's secret is out. you have heard of this daughter, whom all the young men in padua are wild about, though not half a dozen have ever had the good hap to see her face. i know little of the signora beatrice save that rappaccini is said to have instructed her deeply in his science, and that, young and beautiful as fame reports her, she is already qualified to fill a professor's chair. perchance her father destines her for mine! other absurd rumors there be, not worth talking about or listening to. so now, signor giovanni, drink off your glass of lachryma."guasconti returned to his lodgings somewhat heated with the wine he had quaffed, and which caused his brain to swim with strange fantasies in reference to dr. rappaccini and the beautiful beatrice. on his way, happening to pass by a florist's, he bought a fresh bouquet of flowers.ascending to his chamber, he seated himself near the window, but within the shadow thrown by the depth of the wall, so that he could look down into the garden with little risk of being discovered. all beneath his eye was a solitude. the strange plants were basking in the sunshine, and now and then nodding gently to one another, as if in acknowledgment of sympathy and kindred. in the midst, by the shattered fountain, grew the magnificent shrub, with its purple gems clustering all over it; they glowed in the air, and gleamed back again out of the depths of the pool, which thus seemed to overflow with colored radiance from the rich reflection that was steeped in it. at first, as we have said, the garden was a solitude. soon, however,--as giovanni had half hoped, half feared, would be the case,--a figure appeared beneath the antique sculptured portal, and came down between the rows of plants, inhaling their various perfumes as if she were one of those beings of old classic fable that lived upon sweet odors. on again beholding beatrice, the young man was even startled to perceive how much her beauty exceeded his recollection of it; so brilliant, so vivid, was its character, that she glowed amid the sunlight, and, as giovanni whispered to himself, positively illuminated the more shadowy intervals of the garden path. her face being now more revealed than on the former occasion, he was struck by its expression of simplicity and sweetness,--qualities that had not entered into his idea of her character, and which made him ask anew what manner of mortal she might be. nor did he fail again to observe, or imagine, an analogy between the beautiful girl and the gorgeous shrub that hung its gemlike flowers over the fountain,--a resemblance which beatrice seemed to have indulged a fantastic humor in heightening, both by the arrangement of her dress and the selection of its hues.approaching the shrub, she threw open her arms, as with a passionate ardor, and drew its branches into an intimate embrace--so intimate that her features were hidden in its leafy bosom and her glistening ringlets all intermingled with the flowers."give me thy breath, my sister," exclaimed beatrice; "for i am faint with common air. and give me this flower of thine, which i separate with gentlest fingers from the stem and place it close beside my heart."with these words the beautiful daughter of rappaccini plucked one of the richest blossoms of the shrub, and was about to fasten it in her bosom. but now, unless giovanni's draughts of wine had bewildered his senses, a singular incident occurred. a small orange-colored reptile, of the lizard or chameleon species, chanced to be creeping along the path, just at the feet of beatrice. it appeared to giovanni,--but, at the distance from which he gazed, he could scarcely have seen anything so minute,--it appeared to him, however, that a drop or two of moisture from the broken stem of the flower descended upon the lizard's head. for an instant the reptile contorted itself violently, and then lay motionless in the sunshine. beatrice observed this remarkable phenomenon and crossed herself, sadly, but without surprise; nor did she therefore hesitate to arrange the fatal flower in her bosom. there it blushed, and almost glimmered with the dazzling effect of a precious stone, adding to her dress and aspect the one appropriate charm which nothing else in the world could have supplied. but giovanni, out of the shadow of his window, bent forward and shrank back, and murmured and trembled."am i awake? have i my senses?" said he to himself. "what is this being? beautiful shall i call her, or inexpressibly terrible?"beatrice now strayed carelessly through the garden, approaching closer beneath giovanni's window, so that he was compelled to thrust his head quite out of its concealment in order to gratify the intense and painful curiosity which she excited. at this moment there came a beautiful insect over the garden wall; it had, perhaps, wandered through the city, and found no flowers or verdure among those antique haunts of men until the heavy perfumes of dr. rappaccini's shrubs had lured it from afar. without alighting on the flowers, this winged brightness seemed to be attracted by beatrice, and lingered in the air and fluttered about her head. now, here it could not be but that giovanni guasconti's eyes deceived him. be that as it might, he fancied that, while beatrice was gazing at the insect with childish delight, it grew faint and fell at her feet; its bright wings shivered; it was dead--from no cause that he could discern, unless it were the atmosphere of her breath. again beatrice crossed herself and sighed heavily as she bent over the dead insect.an impulsive movement of giovanni drew her eyes to the window. there she beheld the beautiful head of the young man--rather a grecian than an italian head, with fair, regular features, and a glistening of gold among his ringlets--gazing down upon her like a being that hovered in mid air. scarcely knowing what he did, giovanni threw down the bouquet which he had hitherto held in his hand."signora," said he, "there are pure and healthful flowers. wear them for the sake of giovanni guasconti.""thanks, signor," replied beatrice, with her rich voice, that came forth as it were like a gush of music, and with a mirthful expression half childish and half woman-like. "i accept your gift, and would fain recompense it with this precious purple flower; but if i toss it into the air it will not reach you. so signor guasconti must even content himself with my thanks."she lifted the bouquet from the ground, and then, as if inwardly ashamed at having stepped aside from her maidenly reserve to respond to a stranger's greeting, passed swiftly homeward through the garden. but few as the moments were, it seemed to giovanni, when she was on the point of vanishing beneath the sculptured portal, that his beautiful bouquet was already beginning to wither in her grasp. it was an idle thought; there could be no possibility of distinguishing a faded flower from a fresh one at so great a distance.for many days after this incident the young man avoided the window that looked into dr. rappaccini's garden, as if something ugly and monstrous would have blasted his eyesight had he been betrayed into a glance. he felt conscious of having put himself, to a certain extent, within the influence of an unintelligible power by the communication which he had opened with beatrice. the wisest course would have been, if his heart were in any real danger, to quit his lodgings and padua itself at once; the next wiser, to have accustomed himself, as far as possible, to the familiar and daylight view of beatrice--thus bringing her rigidly and systematically within the limits of ordinary experience. least of all, while avoiding her sight, ought giovanni to have remained so near this extraordinary being that the proximity and possibility even of intercourse should give a kind of substance and reality to the wild vagaries which his imagination ran riot continually in producing. guasconti had not a deep heart--or, at all events, its depths were not sounded now; but he had a quick fancy, and an ardent southern temperament, which rose every instant to a higher fever pitch. whether or no beatrice possessed those terrible attributes, that fatal breath, the affinity with those so beautiful and deadly flowers which were indicated by what giovanni had witnessed, she had at least instilled a fierce and subtle poison into his system. it was not love, although her rich beauty was a madness to him; nor horror, even while he fancied her spirit to be imbued with the same baneful essence that seemed to pervade her physical frame; but a wild offspring of both love and horror that had each parent in it, and burned like one and shivered like the other. giovanni knew not what to dread; still less did he know what to hope; yet hope and dread kept a continual warfare in his breast, alternately vanquishing one another and starting up afresh to renew the contest. blessed are all simple emotions, be they dark or bright! it is the lurid intermixture of the two that produces the illuminating blaze of the infernal regions.sometimes he endeavored to assuage the fever of his spirit by a rapid walk through the streets of padua or beyond its gates: his footsteps kept time with the throbbings of his brain, so that the walk was apt to accelerate itself to a race. one day he found himself arrested; his arm was seized by a portly personage, who had turned back on recognizing the young man and expended much breath in overtaking him."signor giovanni! stay, my young friend!" cried he. "have you forgotten me? that might well be the case if i were as much altered as yourself."it was baglioni, whom giovanni had avoided ever since their first meeting, from a doubt that the professor's sagacity would look too deeply into his secrets. endeavoring to recover himself, he stared forth wildly from his inner world into the outer one and spoke like a man in a dream."yes; i am giovanni guasconti. you are professor pietro baglioni. now let me pass!""not yet, not yet, signor giovanni guasconti," said the professor, smiling, but at the same time scrutinizing the youth with an earnest glance. "what! did i grow up side by side with your father? and shall his son pass me like a stranger in these old streets of padua? stand still, signor giovanni; for we must have a word or two before we part.""speedily, then, most worshipful professor, speedily," said giovanni, with feverish impatience. "does not your worship see that i am in haste?"now, while he was speaking there came a man in black along the street, stooping and moving feebly like a person in inferior health. his face was all overspread with a most sickly and sallow hue, but yet so pervaded with an expression of piercing and active intellect that an observer might easily have overlooked the merely physical attributes and have seen only this wonderful energy. as he passed, this person exchanged a cold and distant salutation with baglioni, but fixed his eyes upon giovanni with an intentness that seemed to bring out whatever was within him worthy of notice. nevertheless, there was a peculiar quietness in the look, as if taking merely a speculative, not a human interest, in the young man."it is dr. rappaccini!" whispered the professor when the stranger had passed. "has he ever seen your face before?""not that i know," answered giovanni, starting at the name."he has seen you! he must have seen you!" said baglioni, hastily. "for some purpose or other, this man of science is making a study of you. i know that look of his! it is the same that coldly illuminates his face as he bends over a bird, a mouse, or a butterfly, which, in pursuance of some experiment, he has killed by the perfume of a flower; a look as deep as nature itself, but without nature's warmth of love. signor giovanni, i will stake my life upon it, you are the subject of one of rappaccini's experiments!""will you make a fool of me?" cried giovanni, passionately. "that, signor professor, were an untoward experiment.""patience! patience!" replied the imperturbable professor. "i tell thee, my poor giovanni, that rappaccini has a scientific interest in thee. thou hast fallen into fearful hands! and the signora beatrice,--what part does she act in this mystery?"but guasconti, finding baglioni's pertinacity intolerable, here broke away, and was gone before the professor could again seize his arm. he looked after the young man intently and shook his head."this must not be," said baglioni to himself. "the youth is the son of my old friend, and shall not come to any harm from which the arcana of medical science can preserve him. besides, it is too insufferable an impertinence in rappaccini, thus to snatch the lad out of my own hands, as i may say, and make use of him for his infernal experiments. this daughter of his! it shall be looked to. perchance, most learned rappaccini, i may foil you where you little dream of it!"meanwhile giovanni had pursued a circuitous route, and at length found himself at the door of his lodgings. as he crossed the threshold he was met by old lisabetta, who smirked and smiled, and was evidently desirous to attract his attention; vainly, however, as the ebullition of his feelings had momentarily subsided into a cold and dull vacuity. he turned his eyes full upon the withered face that was puckering itself into a smile, but seemed to behold it not. the old dame, therefore, laid her grasp upon his cloak."signor! signor!" whispered she, still with a smile over the whole breadth of her visage, so that it looked not unlike a grotesque carving in wood, darkened by centuries. "listen, signor! there is a private entrance into the garden!""what do you say?" exclaimed giovanni, turning quickly about, as if an inanimate thing should start into feverish life. "a private entrance into dr. rappaccini's garden?""hush! hush! not so loud!" whispered lisabetta, putting her hand over his mouth. "yes; into the worshipful doctor's garden, where you may see all his fine shrubbery. many a young man in padua would give gold to be admitted among those flowers."giovanni put a piece of gold into her hand."show me the way," said he.a surmise, probably excited by his conversation with baglioni, crossed his mind, that this interposition of old lisabetta might perchance be connected with the intrigue, whatever were its nature, in which the professor seemed to suppose that dr. rappaccini was involving him. but such a suspicion, though it disturbed giovanni, was inadequate to restrain him. the instant that he was aware of the possibility of approaching beatrice, it seemed an absolute necessity of his existence to do so. it mattered not whether she were angel or demon; he was irrevocably within her sphere, and must obey the law that whirled him onward, in ever-lessening circles, towards a result which he did not attempt to foreshadow; and yet, strange to say, there came across him a sudden doubt whether this intense interest on his part were not delusory; whether it were really of so deep and positive a nature as to justify him in now thrusting himself into an incalculable position; whether it were not merely the fantasy of a young man's brain, only slightly or not at all connected with his heart.he paused, hesitated, turned half about, but again went on. his withered guide led him along several obscure passages, and finally undid a door, through which, as it was opened, there came the sight and sound of rustling leaves, with the broken sunshine glimmering among them. giovanni stepped forth, and, forcing himself through the entanglement of a shrub that wreathed its tendrils over the hidden entrance, stood beneath his own window in the open area of dr. rappaccini's garden.how often is it the case that, when impossibilities have come to pass and dreams have condensed their misty substance into tangible realities, we find ourselves calm, and even coldly self-possessed, amid circumstances which it would have been a delirium of joy or agony to anticipate! fate delights to thwart us thus. passion will choose his own time to rush upon the scene, and lingers sluggishly behind when an appropriate adjustment of events would seem to summon his appearance. so was it now with giovanni. day after day his pulses had throbbed with feverish blood at the improbable idea of an interview with beatrice, and of standing with her, face to face, in this very garden, basking in the oriental sunshine of her beauty, and snatching from her full gaze the mystery which he deemed the riddle of his own existence. but now there was a singular and untimely equanimity within his breast. he threw a glance around the garden to discover if beatrice or her father were present, and, perceiving that he was alone, began a critical observation of the plants.the aspect of one and all of them dissatisfied him; their gorgeousness seemed fierce, passionate, and even unnatural. there was hardly an individual shrub which a wanderer, straying by himself through a forest, would not have been startled to find growing wild, as if an unearthly face had glared at him out of the thicket. several also would have shocked a delicate instinct by an appearance of artificialness indicating that there had been such commixture, and, as it were, adultery, of various vegetable species, that the production was no longer of god's making, but the monstrous offspring of man's depraved fancy, glowing with only an evil mockery of beauty. they were probably the result of experiment, which in one or two cases had succeeded in mingling plants individually lovely into a compound possessing the questionable and ominous character that distinguished the whole growth of the garden. in fine, giovanni recognized but two or three plants in the collection, and those of a kind that he well knew to be poisonous. while busy with these contemplations he heard the rustling of a silken garment, and, turning, beheld beatrice emerging from beneath the sculptured portal.giovanni had not considered with himself what should be his deportment; whether he should apologize for his intrusion into the garden, or assume that he was there with the privity at least, if not by the desire, of dr. rappaccini or his daughter; but beatrice's manner placed him at his ease, though leaving him still in doubt by what agency he had gained admittance. she came lightly along the path and met him near the broken fountain. there was surprise in her face, but brightened by a simple and kind expression of pleasure."you are a connoisseur in flowers, signor," said beatrice, with a smile, alluding to the bouquet which he had flung her from the window. "it is no marvel, therefore, if the sight of my father's rare collection has tempted you to take a nearer view. if he were here, he could tell you many strange and interesting facts as to the nature and habits of these shrubs; for he has spent a lifetime in such studies, and this garden is his world.""and yourself, lady," observed giovanni, "if fame says true,--you likewise are deeply skilled in the virtues indicated by these rich blossoms and these spicy perfumes. would you deign to be my instructress, i should prove an apter scholar than if taught by signor rappaccini himself.""are there such idle rumors?" asked beatrice, with the music of a pleasant laugh. "do people say that i am skilled in my father's science of plants? what a jest is there! no; though i have grown up among these flowers, i know no more of them than their hues and perfume; and sometimes methinks i would fain rid myself of even that small knowledge. there are many flowers here, and those not the least brilliant, that shock and offend me when they meet my eye. but pray, signor, do not believe these stories about my science. believe nothing of me save what you see with your own eyes.""and must i believe all that i have seen with my own eyes?" asked giovanni, pointedly, while the recollection of former scenes made him shrink. "no, signora; you demand too little of me. bid me believe nothing save what comes from your own lips."it would appear that beatrice understood him. there came a deep flush to her cheek; but she looked full into giovanni's eyes, and responded to his gaze of uneasy suspicion with a queenlike haughtiness."i do so bid you, signor," she replied. "forget whatever you may have fancied in regard to me. if true to the outward senses, still it may be false in its essence; but the words of beatrice rappaccini's lips are true from the depths of the heart outward. those you may believe."a fervor glowed in her whole aspect and beamed upon giovanni's consciousness like the light of truth itself; but while she spoke there was a fragrance in the atmosphere around her, rich and delightful, though evanescent, yet which the young man, from an indefinable reluctance, scarcely dared to draw into his lungs. it might be the odor of the flowers. could it be beatrice's breath which thus embalmed her words with a strange richness, as if by steeping them in her heart? a faintness passed like a shadow over giovanni and flitted away; he seemed to gaze through the beautiful girl's eyes into her transparent soul, and felt no more doubt or fear.the tinge of passion that had colored beatrice's manner vanished; she became gay, and appeared to derive a pure delight from her communion with the youth not unlike what the maiden of a lonely island might have felt conversing with a voyager from the civilized world. evidently her experience of life had been confined within the limits of that garden. she talked now about matters as simple as the daylight or summer clouds, and now asked questions in reference to the city, or giovanni's distant home, his friends, his mother, and his sisters--questions indicating such seclusion, and such lack of familiarity with modes and forms, that giovanni responded as if to an infant. her spirit gushed out before him like a fresh rill that was just catching its first glimpse of the sunlight and wondering at the reflections of earth and sky which were flung into its bosom. there came thoughts, too, from a deep source, and fantasies of a gemlike brilliancy, as if diamonds and rubies sparkled upward among the bubbles of the fountain. ever and anon there gleamed across the young man's mind a sense of wonder that he should be walking side by side with the being who had so wrought upon his imagination, whom he had idealized in such hues of terror, in whom he had positively witnessed such manifestations of dreadful attributes,--that he should be conversing with beatrice like a brother, and should find her so human and so maidenlike. but such reflections were only momentary; the effect of her character was too real not to make itself familiar at once.in this free intercourse they had strayed through the garden, and now, after many turns among its avenues, were come to the shattered fountain, beside which grew the magnificent shrub, with its treasury of glowing blossoms. a fragrance was diffused from it which giovanni recognized as identical with that which he had attributed to beatrice's breath, but incomparably more powerful. as her eyes fell upon it, giovanni beheld her press her hand to her bosom as if her heart were throbbing suddenly and painfully."for the first time in my life," murmured she, addressing the shrub, "i had forgotten thee.""i remember, signora," said giovanni, "that you once promised to reward me with one of these living gems for the bouquet which i had the happy boldness to fling to your feet. permit me now to pluck it as a memorial of this interview."he made a step towards the shrub with extended hand; but beatrice darted forward, uttering a shriek that went through his heart like a dagger. she caught his hand and drew it back with the whole force of her slender figure. giovanni felt her touch thrilling through his fibres."touch it not!" exclaimed she, in a voice of agony. "not for thy life! it is fatal!"then, hiding her face, she fled from him and vanished beneath the sculptured portal. as giovanni followed her with his eyes, he beheld the emaciated figure and pale intelligence of dr. rappaccini, who had been watching the scene, he knew not how long, within the shadow of the entrance.no sooner was guasconti alone in his chamber than the image of beatrice came back to his passionate musings, invested with all the witchery that had been gathering around it ever since his first glimpse of her, and now likewise imbued with a tender warmth of girlish womanhood. she was human; her nature was endowed with all gentle and feminine qualities; she was worthiest to be worshipped; she was capable, surely, on her part, of the height and heroism of love. those tokens which he had hitherto considered as proofs of a frightful peculiarity in her physical and moral system were now either forgotten, or, by the subtle sophistry of passion transmitted into a golden crown of enchantment, rendering beatrice the more admirable by so much as she was the more unique. whatever had looked ugly was now beautiful; or, if incapable of such a change, it stole away and hid itself among those shapeless half ideas which throng the dim region beyond the daylight of our perfect consciousness. thus did he spend the night, nor fell asleep until the dawn had begun to awake the slumbering flowers in dr. rappaccini's garden, whither giovanni's dreams doubtless led him. up rose the sun in his due season, and, flinging his beams upon the young man's eyelids, awoke him to a sense of pain. when thoroughly aroused, he became sensible of a burning and tingling agony in his hand--in his right hand--the very hand which beatrice had grasped in her own when he was on the point of plucking one of the gemlike flowers. on the back of that hand there was now a purple print like that of four small fingers, and the likeness of a slender thumb upon his wrist.oh, how stubbornly does love,--or even that cunning semblance of love which flourishes in the imagination, but strikes no depth of root into the heart,--how stubbornly does it hold its faith until the moment comes when it is doomed to vanish into thin mist! giovanni wrapped a handkerchief about his hand and wondered what evil thing had stung him, and soon forgot his pain in a reverie of beatrice.after the first interview, a second was in the inevitable course of what we call fate. a third; a fourth; and a meeting with beatrice in the garden was no longer an incident in giovanni's daily life, but the whole space in which he might be said to live; for the anticipation and memory of that ecstatic hour made up the remainder. nor was it otherwise with the daughter of rappaccini. she watched for the youth's appearance, and flew to his side with confidence as unreserved as if they had been playmates from early infancy--as if they were such playmates still. if, by any unwonted chance, he failed to come at the appointed moment, she stood beneath the window and sent up the rich sweetness of her tones to float around him in his chamber and echo and reverberate throughout his heart: "giovanni! giovanni! why tarriest thou? come down!" and down he hastened into that eden of poisonous flowers.but, with all this intimate familiarity, there was still a reserve in beatrice's demeanor, so rigidly and invariably sustained that the idea of infringing it scarcely occurred to his imagination. by all appreciable signs, they loved; they had looked love with eyes that conveyed the holy secret from the depths of one soul into the depths of the other, as if it were too sacred to be whispered by the way; they had even spoken love in those gushes of passion when their spirits darted forth in articulated breath like tongues of long-hidden flame; and yet there had been no seal of lips, no clasp of hands, nor any slightest caress such as love claims and hallows. he had never touched one of the gleaming ringlets of her hair; her garment--so marked was the physical barrier between them--had never been waved against him by a breeze. on the few occasions when giovanni had seemed tempted to overstep the limit, beatrice grew so sad, so stern, and withal wore such a look of desolate separation, shuddering at itself, that not a spoken word was requisite to repel him. at such times he was startled at the horrible suspicions that rose, monster-like, out of the caverns of his heart and stared him in the face; his love grew thin and faint as the morning mist, his doubts alone had substance. but, when beatrice's face brightened again after the momentary shadow, she was transformed at once from the mysterious, questionable being whom he had watched with so much awe and horror; she was now the beautiful and unsophisticated girl whom he felt that his spirit knew with a certainty beyond all other knowledge.a considerable time had now passed since giovanni's last meeting with baglioni. one morning, however, he was disagreeably surprised by a visit from the professor, whom he had scarcely thought of for whole weeks, and would willingly have forgotten still longer. given up as he had long been to a pervading excitement, he could tolerate no companions except upon condition of their perfect sympathy with his present state of feeling. such sympathy was not to be expected from professor baglioni.the visitor chatted carelessly for a few moments about the gossip of the city and the university, and then took up another topic."i have been reading an old classic author lately," said he, "and met with a story that strangely interested me. possibly you may remember it. it is of an indian prince, who sent a beautiful woman as a present to alexander the great. she was as lovely as the dawn and gorgeous as the sunset; but what especially distinguished her was a certain rich perfume in her breath--richer than a garden of persian roses. alexander, as was natural to a youthful conqueror, fell in love at first sight with this magnificent stranger; but a certain sage physician, happening to be present, discovered a terrible secret in regard to her.""and what was that?" asked giovanni, turning his eyes downward to avoid those of the professor."that this lovely woman," continued baglioni, with emphasis, "had been nourished with poisons from her birth upward, until her whole nature was so imbued with them that she herself had become the deadliest poison in existence. poison was her element of life. with that rich perfume of her breath she blasted the very air. her love would have been poison--her embrace death. is not this a marvellous tale?""a childish fable," answered giovanni, nervously starting from his chair. "i marvel how your worship finds time to read such nonsense among your graver studies.""by the by," said the professor, looking uneasily about him, "what singular fragrance is this in your apartment? is it the perfume of your gloves? it is faint, but delicious; and yet, after all, by no means agreeable. were i to breathe it long, methinks it would make me ill. it is like the breath of a flower; but i see no flowers in the chamber.""nor are there any," replied giovanni, who had turned pale as the professor spoke; "nor, i think, is there any fragrance except in your worship's imagination. odors, being a sort of element combined of the sensual and the spiritual, are apt to deceive us in this manner. the recollection of a perfume, the bare idea of it, may easily be mistaken for a present reality.""ay; but my sober imagination does not often play such tricks," said baglioni; "and, were i to fancy any kind of odor, it would be that of some vile apothecary drug, wherewith my fingers are likely enough to be imbued. our worshipful friend rappaccini, as i have heard, tinctures his medicaments with odors richer than those of araby. doubtless, likewise, the fair and learned signora beatrice would minister to her patients with draughts as sweet as a maiden's breath; but woe to him that sips them!"giovanni's face evinced many contending emotions. the tone in which the professor alluded to the pure and lovely daughter of rappaccini was a torture to his soul; and yet the intimation of a view of her character opposite to his own, gave instantaneous distinctness to a thousand dim suspicions, which now grinned at him like so many demons. but he strove hard to quell them and to respond to baglioni with a true lover's perfect faith."signor professor," said he, "you were my father's friend; perchance, too, it is your purpose to act a friendly part towards his son. i would fain feel nothing towards you save respect and deference; but i pray you to observe, signor, that there is one subject on which we must not speak. you know not the signora beatrice. you cannot, therefore, estimate the wrong--the blasphemy, i may even say--that is offered to her character by a light or injurious word.""giovanni! my poor giovanni!" answered the professor, with a calm expression of pity, "i know this wretched girl far better than yourself. you shall hear the truth in respect to the poisoner rappaccini and his poisonous daughter; yes, poisonous as she is beautiful. listen; for, even should you do violence to my gray hairs, it shall not silence me. that old fable of the indian woman has become a truth by the deep and deadly science of rappaccini and in the person of the lovely beatrice."giovanni groaned and hid his face."her father," continued baglioni, "was not restrained by natural affection from offering up his child in this horrible manner as the victim of his insane zeal for science; for, let us do him justice, he is as true a man of science as ever distilled his own heart in an alembic. what, then, will be your fate? beyond a doubt you are selected as the material of some new experiment. perhaps the result is to be death; perhaps a fate more awful still. rappaccini, with what he calls the interest of science before his eyes, will hesitate at nothing.""it is a dream," muttered giovanni to himself; "surely it is a dream.""but," resumed the professor, "be of good cheer, son of my friend. it is not yet too late for the rescue. possibly we may even succeed in bringing back this miserable child within the limits of ordinary nature, from which her father's madness has estranged her. behold this little silver vase! it was wrought by the hands of the renowned benvenuto cellini, and is well worthy to be a love gift to the fairest dame in italy. but its contents are invaluable. one little sip of this antidote would have rendered the most virulent poisons of the borgias innocuous. doubt not that it will be as efficacious against those of rappaccini. bestow the vase, and the precious liquid within it, on your beatrice, and hopefully await the result."baglioni laid a small, exquisitely wrought silver vial on the table and withdrew, leaving what he had said to produce its effect upon the young man's mind."we will thwart rappaccini yet," thought he, chuckling to himself, as he descended the stairs; "but, let us confess the truth of him, he is a wonderful man--a wonderful man indeed; a vile empiric, however, in his practice, and therefore not to be tolerated by those who respect the good old rules of the medical profession."throughout giovanni's whole acquaintance with beatrice, he had occasionally, as we have said, been haunted by dark surmises as to her character; yet so thoroughly had she made herself felt by him as a simple, natural, most affectionate, and guileless creature, that the image now held up by professor baglioni looked as strange and incredible as if it were not in accordance with his own original conception. true, there were ugly recollections connected with his first glimpses of the beautiful girl; he could not quite forget the bouquet that withered in her grasp, and the insect that perished amid the sunny air, by no ostensible agency save the fragrance of her breath. these incidents, however, dissolving in the pure light of her character, had no longer the efficacy of facts, but were acknowledged as mistaken fantasies, by whatever testimony of the senses they might appear to be substantiated. there is something truer and more real than what we can see with the eyes and touch with the finger. on such better evidence had giovanni founded his confidence in beatrice, though rather by the necessary force of her high attributes than by any deep and generous faith on his part. but now his spirit was incapable of sustaining itself at the height to which the early enthusiasm of passion had exalted it; he fell down, grovelling among earthly doubts, and defiled therewith the pure whiteness of beatrice's image. not that he gave her up; he did but distrust. he resolved to institute some decisive test that should satisfy him, once for all, whether there were those dreadful peculiarities in her physical nature which could not be supposed to exist without some corresponding monstrosity of soul. his eyes, gazing down afar, might have deceived him as to the lizard, the insect, and the flowers; but if he could witness, at the distance of a few paces, the sudden blight of one fresh and healthful flower in beatrice's hand, there would be room for no further question. with this idea he hastened to the florist's and purchased a bouquet that was still gemmed with the morning dew-drops.it was now the customary hour of his daily interview with beatrice. before descending into the garden, giovanni failed not to look at his figure in the mirror,--a vanity to be expected in a beautiful young man, yet, as displaying itself at that troubled and feverish moment, the token of a certain shallowness of feeling and insincerity of character. he did gaze, however, and said to himself that his features had never before possessed so rich a grace, nor his eyes such vivacity, nor his cheeks so warm a hue of superabundant life."at least," thought he, "her poison has not yet insinuated itself into my system. i am no flower to perish in her grasp."with that thought he turned his eyes on the bouquet, which he had never once laid aside from his hand. a thrill of indefinable horror shot through his frame on perceiving that those dewy flowers were already beginning to droop; they wore the aspect of things that had been fresh and lovely yesterday. giovanni grew white as marble, and stood motionless before the mirror, staring at his own reflection there as at the likeness of something frightful. he remembered baglioni's remark about the fragrance that seemed to pervade the chamber. it must have been the poison in his breath! then he shuddered--shuddered at himself. recovering from his stupor, he began to watch with curious eye a spider that was busily at work hanging its web from the antique cornice of the apartment, crossing and recrossing the artful system of interwoven lines--as vigorous and active a spider as ever dangled from an old ceiling. giovanni bent towards the insect, and emitted a deep, long breath. the spider suddenly ceased its toil; the web vibrated with a tremor originating in the body of the small artisan. again giovanni sent forth a breath, deeper, longer, and imbued with a venomous feeling out of his heart: he knew not whether he were wicked, or only desperate. the spider made a convulsive gripe with his limbs and hung dead across the window."accursed! accursed!" muttered giovanni, addressing himself. "hast thou grown so poisonous that this deadly insect perishes by thy breath?"at that moment a rich, sweet voice came floating up from the garden."giovanni! giovanni! it is past the hour! why tarriest thou? come down!""yes," muttered giovanni again. "she is the only being whom my breath may not slay! would that it might!"he rushed down, and in an instant was standing before the bright and loving eyes of beatrice. a moment ago his wrath and despair had been so fierce that he could have desired nothing so much as to wither her by a glance; but with her actual presence there came influences which had too real an existence to be at once shaken off: recollections of the delicate and benign power of her feminine nature, which had so often enveloped him in a religious calm; recollections of many a holy and passionate outgush of her heart, when the pure fountain had been unsealed from its depths and made visible in its transparency to his mental eye; recollections which, had giovanni known how to estimate them, would have assured him that all this ugly mystery was but an earthly illusion, and that, whatever mist of evil might seem to have gathered over her, the real beatrice was a heavenly angel. incapable as he was of such high faith, still her presence had not utterly lost its magic. giovanni's rage was quelled into an aspect of sullen insensibility. beatrice, with a quick spiritual sense, immediately felt that there was a gulf of blackness between them which neither he nor she could pass. they walked on together, sad and silent, and came thus to the marble fountain and to its pool of water on the ground, in the midst of which grew the shrub that bore gem-like blossoms. giovanni was affrighted at the eager enjoyment--the appetite, as it were--with which he found himself inhaling the fragrance of the flowers."beatrice," asked he, abruptly, "whence came this shrub?""my father created it," answered she, with simplicity."created it! created it!" repeated giovanni. "what mean you, beatrice?""he is a man fearfully acquainted with the secrets of nature," replied beatrice; "and, at the hour when i first drew breath, this plant sprang from the soil, the offspring of his science, of his intellect, while i was but his earthly child. approach it not!" continued she, observing with terror that giovanni was drawing nearer to the shrub. "it has qualities that you little dream of. but i, dearest giovanni,--i grew up and blossomed with the plant and was nourished with its breath. it was my sister, and i loved it with a human affection; for, alas!--hast thou not suspected it?--there was an awful doom."here giovanni frowned so darkly upon her that beatrice paused and trembled. but her faith in his tenderness reassured her, and made her blush that she had doubted for an instant."there was an awful doom," she continued, "the effect of my father's fatal love of science, which estranged me from all society of my kind. until heaven sent thee, dearest giovanni, oh, how lonely was thy poor beatrice!""was it a hard doom?" asked giovanni, fixing his eyes upon her."only of late have i known how hard it was," answered she, tenderly. "oh, yes; but my heart was torpid, and therefore quiet."giovanni's rage broke forth from his sullen gloom like a lightning flash out of a dark cloud."accursed one!" cried he, with venomous scorn and anger. "and, finding thy solitude wearisome, thou hast severed me likewise from all the warmth of life and enticed me into thy region of unspeakable horror!""giovanni!" exclaimed beatrice, turning her large bright eyes upon his face. the force of his words had not found its way into her mind; she was merely thunderstruck."yes, poisonous thing!" repeated giovanni, beside himself with passion. "thou hast done it! thou hast blasted me! thou hast filled my veins with poison! thou hast made me as hateful, as ugly, as loathsome and deadly a creature as thyself--a world's wonder of hideous monstrosity! now, if our breath be happily as fatal to ourselves as to all others, let us join our lips in one kiss of unutterable hatred, and so die!""what has befallen me?" murmured beatrice, with a low moan out of her heart. "holy virgin, pity me, a poor heart-broken child!""thou,--dost thou pray?" cried giovanni, still with the same fiendish scorn. "thy very prayers, as they come from thy lips, taint the atmosphere with death. yes, yes; let us pray! let us to church and dip our fingers in the holy water at the portal! they that come after us will perish as by a pestilence! let us sign crosses in the air! it will be scattering curses abroad in the likeness of holy symbols!""giovanni," said beatrice, calmly, for her grief was beyond passion, "why dost thou join thyself with me thus in those terrible words? i, it is true, am the horrible thing thou namest me. but thou,--what hast thou to do, save with one other shudder at my hideous misery to go forth out of the garden and mingle with thy race, and forget there ever crawled on earth such a monster as poor beatrice?""dost thou pretend ignorance?" asked giovanni, scowling upon her. "behold! this power have i gained from the pure daughter of rappaccini.there was a swarm of summer insects flitting through the air in search of the food promised by the flower odors of the fatal garden. they circled round giovanni's head, and were evidently attracted towards him by the same influence which had drawn them for an instant within the sphere of several of the shrubs. he sent forth a breath among them, and smiled bitterly at beatrice as at least a score of the insects fell dead upon the ground."i see it! i see it!" shrieked beatrice. "it is my father's fatal science! no, no, giovanni; it was not i! never! never! i dreamed only to love thee and be with thee a little time, and so to let thee pass away, leaving but thine image in mine heart; for, giovanni, believe it, though my body be nourished with poison, my spirit is god's creature, and craves love as its daily food. but my father,--he has united us in this fearful sympathy. yes; spurn me, tread upon me, kill me! oh, what is death after such words as thine? but it was not i. not for a world of bliss would i have done it."giovanni's passion had exhausted itself in its outburst from his lips. there now came across him a sense, mournful, and not without tenderness, of the intimate and peculiar relationship between beatrice and himself. they stood, as it were, in an utter solitude, which would be made none the less solitary by the densest throng of human life. ought not, then, the desert of humanity around them to press this insulated pair closer together? if they should be cruel to one another, who was there to be kind to them? besides, thought giovanni, might there not still be a hope of his returning within the limits of ordinary nature, and leading beatrice, the redeemed beatrice, by the hand? o, weak, and selfish, and unworthy spirit, that could dream of an earthly union and earthly happiness as possible, after such deep love had been so bitterly wronged as was beatrice's love by giovanni's blighting words! no, no; there could be no such hope. she must pass heavily, with that broken heart, across the borders of time--she must bathe her hurts in some fount of paradise, and forget her grief in the light of immortality, and there be well.but giovanni did not know it."dear beatrice," said he, approaching her, while she shrank away as always at his approach, but now with a different impulse, "dearest beatrice, our fate is not yet so desperate. behold! there is a medicine, potent, as a wise physician has assured me, and almost divine in its efficacy. it is composed of ingredients the most opposite to those by which thy awful father has brought this calamity upon thee and me. it is distilled of blessed herbs. shall we not quaff it together, and thus be purified from evil?""give it me!" said beatrice, extending her hand to receive the little silver vial which giovanni took from his bosom. she added, with a peculiar emphasis, "i will drink; but do thou await the result."she put baglioni's antidote to her lips; and, at the same moment, the figure of rappaccini emerged from the portal and came slowly towards the marble fountain. as he drew near, the pale man of science seemed to gaze with a triumphant expression at the beautiful youth and maiden, as might an artist who should spend his life in achieving a picture or a group of statuary and finally be satisfied with his success. he paused; his bent form grew erect with conscious power; he spread out his hands over them in the attitude of a father imploring a blessing upon his children; but those were the same hands that had thrown poison into the stream of their lives. giovanni trembled. beatrice shuddered nervously, and pressed her hand upon her heart."my daughter," said rappaccini, "thou art no longer lonely in the world. pluck one of those precious gems from thy sister shrub and bid thy bridegroom wear it in his bosom. it will not harm him now. my science and the sympathy between thee and him have so wrought within his system that he now stands apart from common men, as thou dost, daughter of my pride and triumph, from ordinary women. pass on, then, through the world, most dear to one another and dreadful to all besides!""my father," said beatrice, feebly,--and still as she spoke she kept her hand upon her heart,--"wherefore didst thou inflict this miserable doom upon thy child?""miserable!" exclaimed rappaccini. "what mean you, foolish girl? dost thou deem it misery to be endowed with marvellous gifts against which no power nor strength could avail an enemy--misery, to be able to quell the mightiest with a breath--misery, to be as terrible as thou art beautiful? wouldst thou, then, have preferred the condition of a weak woman, exposed to all evil and capable of none?""i would fain have been loved, not feared," murmured beatrice, sinking down upon the ground. "but now it matters not. i am going, father, where the evil which thou hast striven to mingle with my being will pass away like a dream-like the fragrance of these poisonous flowers, which will no longer taint my breath among the flowers of eden. farewell, giovanni! thy words of hatred are like lead within my heart; but they, too, will fall away as i ascend. oh, was there not, from the first, more poison in thy nature than in mine?"to beatrice,--so radically had her earthly part been wrought upon by rappaccini's skill,--as poison had been life, so the powerful antidote was death; and thus the poor victim of man's ingenuity and of thwarted nature, and of the fatality that attends all such efforts of perverted wisdom, perished there, at the feet of her father and giovanni. just at that moment professor pietro baglioni looked forth from the window, and called loudly, in a tone of triumph mixed with horror, to the thunderstricken man of science,"rappaccini! rappaccini! and is this the upshot of your experiment!"there is a certain church in the city of new york which i have always regarded with peculiar interest, on account of a marriage there solemnized, under very singular circumstances, in my grandmother's girlhood. that venerable lady chanced to be a spectator of the scene, and ever after made it her favorite narrative. whether the edifice now standing on the same site be the identical one to which she referred, i am not antiquarian enough to know; nor would it be worth while to correct myself, perhaps, of an agreeable error, by reading the date of its erection on the tablet over the door. it is a stately church, surrounded by an inclosure of the loveliest green, within which appear urns, pillars, obelisks, and other forms of monumental marble, the tributes of private affection, or more splendid memorials of historic dust. with such a place, though the tumult of the city rolls beneath its tower, one would be willing to connect some legendary interest.the marriage might be considered as the result of an early engagement, though there had been two intermediate weddings on the lady's part, and forty years of celibacy on that of the gentleman. at sixty-five, mr. ellenwood was a shy, but not quite a secluded man; selfish, like all men who brood over their own hearts, yet manifesting on rare occasions a vein of generous sentiment; a scholar throughout life, though always an indolent one, because his studies had no definite object, either of public advantage or personal ambition; a gentleman, high bred and fastidiously delicate, yet sometimes requiring a considerable relaxation, in his behalf, of the common rules of society. in truth, there were so many anomalies in his character, and though shrinking with diseased sensibility from public notice, it had been his fatality so often to become the topic of the day, by some wild eccentricity of conduct, that people searched his lineage for an hereditary taint of insanity. but there was no need of this. his caprices had their origin in a mind that lacked the support of an engrossing purpose, and in feelings that preyed upon themselves for want of other food. if he were mad, it was the consequence, and not the cause, of an aimless and abortive life.the widow was as complete a contrast to her third bridegroom, in everything but age, as can well be conceived. compelled to relinquish her first engagement, she had been united to a man of twice her own years, to whom she became an exemplary wife, and by whose death she was left in possession of a splendid fortune. a southern gentleman, considerably younger than herself, succeeded to her hand, and carried her to charleston, where, after many uncomfortable years, she found herself again a widow. it would have been singular, if any uncommon delicacy of feeling had survived through such a life as mrs. dabney's; it could not but be crushed and killed by her early disappointment, the cold duty of her first marriage, the dislocation of the heart's principles, consequent on a second union, and the unkindness of her southern husband, which had inevitably driven her to connect the idea of his death with that of her comfort. to be brief, she was that wisest, but unloveliest, variety of woman, a philosopher, bearing troubles of the heart with equanimity, dispensing with all that should have been her happiness, and making the best of what remained. sage in most matters, the widow was perhaps the more amiable for the one frailty that made her ridiculous. being childless, she could not remain beautiful by proxy, in the person of a daughter; she therefore refused to grow old and ugly, on any consideration; she struggled with time, and held fast her roses in spite of him, till the venerable thief appeared to have relinquished the spoil, as not worth the trouble of acquiring it.the approaching marriage of this woman of the world with such an unworldly man as mr. ellenwood was announced soon after mrs. dabney's return to her native city. superficial observers, and deeper ones, seemed to concur in supposing that the lady must have borne no inactive part in arranging the affair; there were considerations of expediency which she would be far more likely to appreciate than mr. ellenwood; and there was just the specious phantom of sentiment and romance in this late union of two early lovers which sometimes makes a fool of a woman who has lost her true feelings among the accidents of life. all the wonder was, how the gentleman, with his lack of worldly wisdom and agonizing consciousness of ridicule, could have been induced to take a measure at once so prudent and so laughable. but while people talked the wedding-day arrived. the ceremony was to be solemnized according to the episcopalian forms, and in open church, with a degree of publicity that attracted many spectators, who occupied the front seats of the galleries, and the pews near the altar and along the broad aisle. it had been arranged, or possibly it was the custom of the day, that the parties should proceed separately to church. by some accident the bridegroom was a little less punctual than the widow and her bridal attendants; with whose arrival, after this tedious, but necessary preface, the action of our tale may be said to commence.the clumsy wheels of several old-fashioned coaches were heard, and the gentlemen and ladies composing the bridal party came through the church door with the sudden and gladsome effect of a burst of sunshine. the whole group, except the principal figure, was made up of youth and gayety. as they streamed up the broad aisle, while the pews and pillars seemed to brighten on either side, their steps were as buoyant as if they mistook the church for a ball-room, and were ready to dance hand in hand to the altar. so brilliant was the spectacle that few took notice of a singular phenomenon that had marked its entrance. at the moment when the bride's foot touched the threshold the bell swung heavily in the tower above her, and sent forth its deepest knell. the vibrations died away and returned with prolonged solemnity, as she entered the body of the church."good heavens! what an omen," whispered a young lady to her lover."on my honor," replied the gentleman, "i believe the bell has the good taste to toll of its own accord. what has she to do with weddings? if you, dearest julia, were approaching the altar the bell would ring out its merriest peal. it has only a funeral knell for her."the bride and most of her company had been too much occupied with the bustle of entrance to hear the first boding stroke of the bell, or at least to reflect on the singularity of such a welcome to the altar. they therefore continued to advance with undiminished gayety. the gorgeous dresses of the time, the crimson velvet coats, the gold-laced hats, the hoop petticoats, the silk, satin, brocade, and embroidery, the buckles, canes, and swords, all displayed to the best advantage on persons suited to such finery, made the group appear more like a bright-colored picture than anything real. but by what perversity of taste had the artist represented his principal figure as so wrinkled and decayed, while yet he had decked her out in the brightest splendor of attire, as if the loveliest maiden had suddenly withered into age, and become a moral to the beautiful around her! on they went, however, and had glittered along about a third of the aisle, when another stroke of the bell seemed to fill the church with a visible gloom, dimming and obscuring the bright pageant, till it shone forth again as from a mist.this time the party wavered, stopped, and huddled closer together, while a slight scream was heard from some of the ladies, and a confused whispering among the gentlemen. thus tossing to and fro, they might have been fancifully compared to a splendid bunch of flowers, suddenly shaken by a puff of wind, which threatened to scatter the leaves of an old, brown, withered rose, on the same stalk with two dewy buds,--such being the emblem of the widow between her fair young bridemaids. but her heroism was admirable. she had started with an irrepressible shudder, as if the stroke of the bell had fallen directly on her heart; then, recovering herself, while her attendants were yet in dismay, she took the lead, and paced calmly up the aisle. the bell continued to swing, strike, and vibrate, with the same doleful regularity as when a corpse is on its way to the tomb."my young friends here have their nerves a little shaken," said the widow, with a smile, to the clergyman at the altar. "but so many weddings have been ushered in with the merriest peal of the bells, and yet turned out unhappily, that i shall hope for better fortune under such different auspices.""madam," answered the rector, in great perplexity, "this strange occurrence brings to my mind a marriage sermon of the famous bishop taylor, wherein he mingles so many thoughts of mortality and future woe, that, to speak somewhat after his own rich style, he seems to hang the bridal chamber in black, and cut the wedding garment out of a coffin pall. and it has been the custom of divers nations to infuse something of sadness into their marriage ceremonies, so to keep death in mind while contracting that engagement which is life's chiefest business. thus we may draw a sad but profitable moral from this funeral knell."but, though the clergyman might have given his moral even a keener point, he did not fail to dispatch an attendant to inquire into the mystery, and stop those sounds, so dismally appropriate to such a marriage. a brief space elapsed, during which the silence was broken only by whispers, and a few suppressed titterings, among the wedding party and the spectators, who, after the first shock, were disposed to draw an ill-natured merriment from the affair. the young have less charity for aged follies than the old for those of youth. the widow's glance was observed to wander, for an instant, towards a window of the church, as if searching for the time-worn marble that she had dedicated to her first husband; then her eyelids dropped over their faded orbs, and her thoughts were drawn irresistibly to another grave. two buried men, with a voice at her ear, and a cry afar off, were calling her to lie down beside them. perhaps, with momentary truth of feeling, she thought how much happier had been her fate, if, after years of bliss, the bell were now tolling for her funeral, and she were followed to the grave by the old affection of her earliest lover, long her husband. but why had she returned to him, when their cold hearts shrank from each other's embrace?still the death-bell tolled so mournfully, that the sunshine seemed to fade in the air. a whisper, communicated from those who stood nearest the windows, now spread through the church; a hearse, with a train of several coaches, was creeping along the street, conveying some dead man to the churchyard, while the bride awaited a living one at the altar. immediately after, the footsteps of the bridegroom and his friends were heard at the door. the widow looked down the aisle, and clinched the arm of one of her bridemaids in her bony hand with such unconscious violence, that the fair girl trembled."you frighten me, my dear madam!" cried she. "for heaven's sake, what is the matter?""nothing, my dear, nothing," said the widow; then, whispering close to her ear, "there is a foolish fancy that i cannot get rid of. i am expecting my bridegroom to come into the church, with my first two husbands for groomsmen!""look, look!" screamed the bridemaid. "what is here? the funeral!"as she spoke, a dark procession paced into the church. first came an old man and women, like chief mourners at a funeral, attired from head to foot in the deepest black, all but their pale features and hoary hair; he leaning on a staff, and supporting her decrepit form with his nerveless arm. behind appeared another, and another pair, as aged, as black, and mournful as the first. as they drew near, the widow recognized in every face some trait of former friends, long forgotten, but now returning, as if from their old graves, to warn her to prepare a shroud; or, with purpose almost as unwelcome, to exhibit their wrinkles and infirmity, and claim her as their companion by the tokens of her own decay. many a merry night had she danced with them, in youth. and now, in joyless age, she felt that some withered partner should request her hand, and all unite, in a dance of death, to the music of the funeral bell.while these aged mourners were passing up the aisle, it was observed that, from pew to pew, the spectators shuddered with irrepressible awe, as some object, hitherto concealed by the intervening figures, came full in sight. many turned away their faces; others kept a fixed and rigid stare; and a young girl giggled hysterically, and fainted with the laughter on her lips. when the spectral procession approached the altar, each couple separated, and slowly diverged, till, in the centre, appeared a form, that had been worthily ushered in with all this gloomy pomp, the death knell, and the funeral. it was the bridegroom in his shroud!no garb but that of the grave could have befitted such a deathlike aspect; the eyes, indeed, had the wild gleam of a sepulchral lamp; all else was fixed in the stern calmness which old men wear in the coffin. the corpse stood motionless, but addressed the widow in accents that seemed to melt into the clang of the bell, which fell heavily on the air while he spoke."come, my bride!" said those pale lips, "the hearse is ready. the sexton stands waiting for us at the door of the tomb. let us be married; and then to our coffins!"how shall the widow's horror be represented? it gave her the ghastliness of a dead man's bride. her youthful friends stood apart, shuddering at the mourners, the shrouded bridegroom, and herself; the whole scene expressed, by the strongest imagery, the vain struggle of the gilded vanities of this world, when opposed to age, infirmity, sorrow, and death. the awe-struck silence was first broken by the clergyman."mr. ellenwood," said he, soothingly, yet with somewhat of authority, "you are not well. your mind has been agitated by the unusual circumstances in which you are placed. the ceremony must be deferred. as an old friend, let me entreat you to return home.""home! yes, but not without my bride," answered he, in the same hollow accents. "you deem this mockery; perhaps madness. had i bedizened my aged and broken frame with scarlet and embroidery--had i forced my withered lips to smile at my dead heart--that might have been mockery, or madness. but now, let young and old declare, which of us has come hither without a wedding garment, the bridegroom or the bride!"he stepped forward at a ghostly pace, and stood beside the widow, contrasting the awful simplicity of his shroud with the glare and glitter in which she had arrayed herself for this unhappy scene. none, that beheld them, could deny the terrible strength of the moral which his disordered intellect had contrived to draw."cruel! cruel!" groaned the heart-stricken bride."cruel!" repeated he; then, losing his deathlike composure in a wild bitterness: "heaven judge which of us has been cruel to the other! in youth you deprived me of my happiness, my hopes, my aims; you took away all the substance of my life, and made it a dream without reality enough even to grieve at--with only a pervading gloom, through which i walked wearily, and cared not whither. but after forty years, when i have built my tomb, and would not give up the thought of resting there--nor not for such a life as we once pictured--you call me to the altar. at your summons i am here. but other husbands have enjoyed your youth, your beauty, your warmth of heart, and all that could be termed your life. what is there for me but your decay and death? and therefore i have bidden these funeral friends, and bespoken the sexton's deepest knell, and am come, in my shroud, to wed you, as with a burial service, that we may join our hands at the door of the sepulchre, and enter it together."it was not frenzy; it was not merely the drunkenness of strong emotion, in a heart unused to it, that now wrought upon the bride. the stern lesson of the day had done its work; her worldliness was gone. she seized the bridegroom's hand."yes!" cried she. "let us wed, even at the door of the sepulchre! my life is gone in vanity and emptiness. but at its close there is one true feeling. it has made me what i was in youth; it makes me worthy of you. time is no more for both of us. let us wed for eternity!"with a long and deep regard, the bridegroom looked into her eyes, while a tear was gathering in his own. how strange that gush of human feeling from the frozen bosom of a corpse! he wiped away the tears even with his shroud."beloved of my youth," said he, "i have been wild. the despair of my whole lifetime had returned at once, and maddened me. forgive; and be forgiven. yes; it is evening with us now; and we have realized none of our morning dreams of happiness. but let us join our hands before the altar as lovers whom adverse circumstances have separated through life, yet who meet again as they are leaving it, and find their earthly affection changed into something holy as religion. and what is time, to the married of eternity?"amid the tears of many, and a swell of exalted sentiment, in those who felt aright, was solemnized the union of two immortal souls. the train of withered mourners, the hoary bridegroom in his shroud, the pale features of the aged bride, and the death-bell tolling through the whole, till its deep voice overpowered the marriage words, all marked the funeral of earthly hopes. but as the ceremony proceeded, the organ, as if stirred by the sympathies of this impressive scene, poured forth an anthem, first mingling with the dismal knell, then rising to a loftier strain, till the soul looked down upon its woe. and when the awful rite was finished, and with cold hand in cold hand, the married of eternity withdrew, the organ's peal of solemn triumph drowned the wedding knell.young goodman brown came forth at sunset into the street at salem village; but put his head back after crossing the threshold, to exchange a parting kiss with his young wife. and faith, as the wife was aptly named, thrust her own pretty head into the street, letting the wind play with the pink ribbons of her cap while she called to goodman brown."dearest heart," whispered she, softly and rather sadly, when her lips were close to his ear, "prithee put off your journey until sunrise and sleep in your own bed to-night. a lone woman is troubled with such dreams and such thoughts that she's afeard of herself sometimes. pray tarry with me this night, dear husband, of all nights in the year.""my love and my faith," replied young goodman brown, "of all nights in the year, this one night must i tarry away from thee. my journey, as thou callest it, forth and back again, must needs be done 'twixt now and sunrise. what, my sweet, pretty wife, cost thou doubt me already, and we but three months married?""then god bless you!" said faith, with the pink ribbons; "and may you find all well when you come back.""amen!" cried goodman brown. "say thy prayers, dear faith, and go to bed at dusk, and no harm will come to thee."so they parted; and the young man pursued his way until, being about to turn the corner by the meeting-hduse, he looked back and saw the head of faith still peeping after him with a melancholy air, in spite of her pink ribbons."poor little faith!" thought he, for his heart smote him. "what a wretch am i to leave her on such an errand! she talks of dreams, too. methought as she spoke there was trouble in her face, as if a dream had warned her what work is to be done to-night. but no, no; 't would kill her to think it. well, she's a blessed angel on earth; and after this one night i'll cling to her skirts and follow her to heaven."with this excellent resolve for the future, goodman brown felt himself justified in making more haste on his present evil purpose. he had taken a dreary road, darkened by all the gloomiest trees of the forest, which barely stood aside to let the narrow path creep through, and closed immediately behind. it was all as lonely as could be; and there is this peculiarity in such a solitude, that the traveller knows not who may be concealed by the innumerable trunks and the thick boughs overhead; so that with lonely footsteps he may yet be passing through an unseen multitude."there may be a devilish indian behind every tree," said goodman brown to himself; and he glanced fearfully behind him as he added, "what if the devil himself should be at my very elbow!"his head being turned back, he passed a crook of the road, and, looking forward again, beheld the figure of a man, in grave and decent attire, seated at the foot of an old tree. he arose at goodman brown's approach and walked onward side by side with him.   "you are late, goodman brown," said he. "the clock of the old south was striking as i came through boston, and that is full fifteen minutes agone.""faith kept me back a while," replied the young man, with a tremor in his voice, caused by the sudden appearance of his companion, though not wholly unexpected.it was now deep dusk in the forest, and deepest in that part of it where these two were journeying. as nearly as could be discerned, the second traveller was about fifty years old, apparently in the same rank of life as goodman brown, and bearing a considerable resemblance to him, though perhaps more in expression than features. still they might have been taken for father and son. and yet, though the elder person was as simply clad as the younger, and as simple in manner too, he had an indescribable air of one who knew the world, and who would not have felt abashed at the governor's dinner table or in king william's court, were it possible that his affairs should call him thither. but the only thing about him that could be fixed upon as remarkable was his staff, which bore the likeness of a great black snake, so curiously wrought that it might almost be seen to twist and wriggle itself like a living serpent. this, of course, must have been an ocular deception, assisted by the uncertain light."come, goodman brown," cried his fellow-traveller, "this is a dull pace for the beginning of a journey. take my staff, if you are so soon weary.""friend," said the other, exchanging his slow pace for a full stop, "having kept covenant by meeting thee here, it is my purpose now to return whence i came. i have scruples touching the matter thou wot'st of.""sayest thou so?" replied he of the serpent, smiling apart. "let us walk on, nevertheless, reasoning as we go; and if i convince thee not thou shalt turn back. we are but a little way in the forest yet.""too far! too far!" exclaimed the goodman, unconsciously resuming his walk. "my father never went into the woods on such an errand, nor his father before him. we have been a race of honest men and good christians since the days of the martyrs; and shall i be the first of the name of brown that ever took this path and kept--""such company, thou wouldst say," observed the elder person, interpreting his pause. "well said, goodman brown! i have been as well acquainted with your family as with ever a one among the puritans; and that's no trifle to say. i helped your grandfather, the constable, when he lashed the quaker woman so smartly through the streets of salem; and it was i that brought your father a pitch-pine knot, kindled at my own hearth, to set fire to an indian village, in king philip's war. they were my good friends, both; and many a pleasant walk have we had along this path, and returned merrily after midnight. i would fain be friends with you for their sake.""if it be as thou gayest," replied goodman brown, "i marvel they never spoke of these matters; or, verily, i marvel not, seeing that the least rumor of the sort would have driven them from new england. we are a people of prayer, and good works to boot, and abide no such wickedness.""wickedness or not," said the traveller with the twisted staff, "i have a very general acquaintance here in new england. the deacons of many a church have drunk the communion wine with me; the selectmen of divers towns make me their chairman; and a majority of the great and general court are firm supporters of my interest. the governor and i, too--but these are state secrets.""can this be so?" cried goodman brown, with a stare of amazement at his undisturbed companion. "howbeit, i have nothing to do with the governor and council; they have their own ways, and are no rule for a simple husbandman like me. but, were i to go on with thee, how should i meet the eye of that good old man, our minister, at salem village? oh, his voice would make me tremble both sabbath day and lecture day."thus far the elder traveller had listened with due gravity; but now burst into a fit of irrepressible mirth, shaking himself so violently that his snakelike staff actually seemed to wriggle in sympathy."ha! ha! ha!" shouted he again and again; then composing himself, "well, go on, goodman brown, go on; but, prithee, don't kill me with laughing.""well, then, to end the matter at once," said goodman brown, considerably nettled, "there is my wife, faith. it would break her dear little heart; and i'd rather break my own.""nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy ways, goodman brown. i would not for twenty old women like the one hobbling before us that faith should come to any harm."as he spoke he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path, in whom goodman brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame, who had taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and spiritual adviser, jointly with the minister and deacon gookin.   "a marvel, truly, that goody cloyse should be so far in the wilderness at nightfall," said he. "but with your leave, friend, i shall take a cut through the woods until we have left this christian woman behind. being a stranger to you, she might ask whom i was consorting with and whither i was going.""be it so," said his fellow-traveller. "betake you the woods' and let me keep the path."accordingly the young man turned aside, but took care to watch his companion, who advanced softly along the road until he had come within a staff's length of the old dame. she, meanwhile, was making the best of her way, with singular speed for so aged a woman, and mumbling some indistinct words--a prayer, doubtless--as she went. the traveller put forth his staff and touched her withered neck with what seemed the serpent's tail."the devil!" screamed the pious old lady."then goody cloyse knows her old friend?" observed the traveller, confronting her and leaning on his writhing stick."ah, forsooth, and is it your worship indeed?" cried the good dame."yea, truly is it, and in the very image of my old gossip, goodman brown, the grandfather of the silly fellow that now is. but--would your worship believe it?--my broomstick hath strangely disappeared, stolen, as i suspect, by that unhanged witch, goody cory, and that, too, when i was all anointed with the juice of smallage, and cinquefoil, and wolf's bane--""mingled with fine wheat and the fat of a new-born babe," said the shape of old goodman brown."ah, your worship knows the recipe," cried the old lady, cackling aloud. "so, as i was saying, being all ready for the meeting, and no horse to ride on, i made up my mind to foot it; for they tell me there is a nice young man to be taken into communion to-night. but now your good worship will lend me your arm, and we shall be there in a twinkling.""that can hardly be," answered her friend. "i may not spare you my arm, goody cloyse; but here is my staff, if you will."so saying, he threw it down at her feet, where, perhaps, it assumed life, being one of the rods which its owner had formerly lent to the egyptian magi. of this fact, however, goodman brown could not take cognizance. he had cast up his eyes in astonishment, and, looking down again, beheld neither goody cloyse nor the serpentine staff, but this fellow-traveller alone, who waited for him as calmly as if nothing had happened."that old woman taught me my catechism," said the young man; and there was a world of meaning in this simple comment.they continued to walk onward, while the elder traveller exhorted his companion to make good speed and persevere in the path, discoursing so aptly that his arguments seemed rather to spring up in the bosom of his auditor than to be suggested by himself. as they went, he plucked: a branch of maple to serve for a walking stick, and began to strip it of the twigs and little boughs, which were wet with evening dew. the moment his fingers touched them they became strangely withered and dried up as with a week's sunshine. thus the pair proceeded, at a good free pace, until suddenly, in a gloomy hollow of the road, goodman brown sat himself down on the stump of a tree and refused to go any farther."friend," said he, stubbornly, "my mind is made up. not another step will i budge on this errand. what if a wretched old woman do choose to go to the devil when i thought she was going to heaven: is that any reason why i should quit my dear faith and go after her?""you will think better of this by and by," said his acquaintance, composedly. "sit here and rest yourself a while; and when you feel like moving again, there is my staff to help you along."without more words, he threw his companion the maple stick, and was as speedily out of sight as if he had vanished into the deepening gloom. the young man sat a few moments by the roadside, applauding himself greatly, and thinking with how clear a conscience he should meet the minister in his morning walk, nor shrink from the eye of good old deacon gookin. and what calm sleep would be his that very night, which was to have been spent so wickedly, but so purely and sweetly now, in the arms of faith! amidst these pleasant and praiseworthy meditations, goodman brown heard the tramp of horses along the road, and deemed it advisable to conceal himself within the verge of the forest, conscious of the guilty purpose that had brought him thither, though now so happily turned from it.on came the hoof tramps and the voices of the riders, two grave old voices, conversing soberly as they drew near. these mingled sounds appeared to pass along the road, within a few yards of the young man's hiding-place; but, owing doubtless to the depth of the gloom at that particular spot, neither the travellers nor their steeds were visible. though their figures brushed the small boughs by the wayside, it could not be seen that they intercepted, even for a moment, the faint gleam from the strip of bright sky athwart which they must have passed. goodman brown alternately crouched and stood on tiptoe, pulling aside the branches and thrusting forth his head as far as he durst without discerning so much as a shadow. it vexed him the more, because he could have sworn, were such a thing possible, that he recognized the voices of the minister and deacon gookin, jogging along quietly, as they were wont to do, when bound to some ordination or ecclesiastical council. while yet within hearing, one of the riders stopped to pluck a switch."of the two, reverend sir," said the voice like the deacon's, "i had rather miss an ordination dinner than to-night's meeting. they tell me that some of our community are to be here from falmouth and beyond, and others from connecticut and rhode island, besides several of the indian powwows, who, after their fashion, know almost as much deviltry as the best of us. moreover, there is a goodly young woman to be taken into communion.""mighty well, deacon gookin!" replied the solemn old tones of the minister. "spur up, or we shall be late. nothing can be done, you know, until i get on the ground."the hoofs clattered again; and the voices, talking so strangely in the empty air, passed on through the forest, where no church had ever been gathered or solitary christian prayed. whither, then, could these holy men be journeying so deep into the heathen wilderness? young goodman brown caught hold of a tree for support, being ready to sink down on the ground, faint and overburdened with the heavy sickness of his heart. he looked up to the sky, doubting whether there really was a heaven above him. yet there was the blue arch, and the stars brightening in it."with heaven above and faith below, i will yet stand firm against the devil!" cried goodman brown.while he still gazed upward into the deep arch of the firmament and had lifted his hands to pray, a cloud, though no wind was stirring, hurried across the zenith and hid the brightening stars. the blue sky was still visible, except directly overhead, where this black mass of cloud was sweeping swiftly northward. aloft in the air, as if from the depths of the cloud, came a confused and doubtful sound of voices. once the listener fancied that he could distinguish the accents of towns-people of his own, men and women, both pious and ungodly, many of whom he had met at the communion table, and had seen others rioting at the tavern. the next moment, so indistinct were the sounds, he doubted whether he had heard aught but the murmur of the old forest, whispering without a wind. then came a stronger swell of those familiar tones, heard daily in the sunshine at salem village, but never until now from a cloud of night. there was one voice, of a young woman, uttering lamentations, yet with an uncertain sorrow, and entreating for some favor, which, perhaps, it would grieve her to obtain; and all the unseen multitude, both saints and sinners, seemed to encourage her onward."faith!" shouted goodman brown, in a voice of agony and desperation; and the echoes of the forest mocked him, crying, "faith! faith!" as if bewildered wretches were seeking her all through the wilderness.the cry of grief, rage, and terror was yet piercing the night, when the unhappy husband held his breath for a response. there was a scream, drowned immediately in a louder murmur of voices, fading into far-off laughter, as the dark cloud swept away, leaving the clear and silent sky above goodman brown. but something fluttered lightly down through the air and caught on the branch of a tree. the young man seized it, and beheld a pink ribbon."my faith is gone!" cried he, after one stupefied moment. "there is no good on earth; and sin is but a name. come, devil; for to thee is this world given."and, maddened with despair, so that he laughed loud and long, did goodman brown grasp his staff and set forth again, at such a rate that he seemed to fly along the forest path rather than to walk or run. the road grew wilder and drearier and more faintly traced, and vanished at length, leaving him in the heart of the dark wilderness, still rushing onward with the instinct that guides mortal man to evil. the whole forest was peopled with frightful sounds--the creaking of the trees, the howling of wild beasts, and the yell of indians; while sometimes the wind tolled like a distant church bell, and sometimes gave a broad roar around the traveller, as if all nature were laughing him to scorn. but he was himself the chief horror of the scene, and shrank not from its other horrors."ha! ha! ha!" roared goodman brown when the wind laughed at him "let us hear which will laugh loudest. think not to frighten me with your deviltry. come witch, come wizard, come indian powwow, come devil himself, and here comes goodman brown. you may as well fear him as he fear you."in truth, all through the haunted forest there could be nothing more frightful than the figure of goodman brown. on he flew among the black pines, brandishing his staff with frenzied gestures, now giving vent to an inspiration of horrid blasphemy, and now shouting forth such laughter as set all the echoes of the forest laughing like demons around him. the fiend in his own shape is less hideous than when he rages in the breast of man. thus sped the demoniac on his course, until, quivering among the trees, he saw a red light before him, as when the felled trunks and branches of a clearing have been set on fire, and throw up their lurid blaze against the sky, at the hour of midnight. he paused, in a lull of the tempest that had driven him onward, and heard the swell of what seemed a hymn, rolling solemnly from a distance with the weight of many voices. he knew the tune; it was a familiar one in the choir of the village meetinghouse. the verse died heavily away, and was lengthened by a chorus, not of human voices, but of all the sounds of the benighted wilderness pealing in awful harmony together. goodman brown cried out, and his cry was lost to his own ear by its unison with the cry of the desert.in the interval of silence he stole forward until the light glared full upon his eyes. at one extremity of an open space, hemmed in by the dark wall of the forest, arose a rock, bearing some rude, natural resemblance either to an altar or a pulpit, and surrounded by four blazing pines, their tops aflame, their stems untouched, like candles at an evening meeting. the mass of foliage that had overgrown the summit of the rock was all on fire, blazing high into the night and fitfully illuminating the whole field. each pendent twig and leafy festoon was in a blaze. as the red light arose and fell' a numerous congregation alternately shone forth, then disappeared in shadow, and again grew, as it were, out of the darkness, peopling the heart of the solitary woods at once."a grave and dark-clad company," quoth goodman brown.in truth they were such. among them, quivering to and fro between gloom and splendor, appeared faces that would be seen next day at the council board of the province, and others which, sabbath after sabbath, looked devoutly heavenward, and benignantly over the crowded pews, from the holiest pulpits in the land. some affirm that the lady of the governor was there. at least there were high dames well known to her, and wives of honored husbands, and widows, a great multitude, and ancient maidens, all of excellent repute, and fair young girls, who trembled lest their mothers should espy them. either the sudden gleams of light flashing over the obscure field bedazzled goodman brown, or he recognized a score of the church members of salem village famous for their especial sanctity. good old deacon gookin had arrived, and waited at the skirts of that venerable saint, his revered pastor. but, irreverently consorting with these grave, reputable, and pious people, these elders of the church, these chaste dames and dewy virgins, there were men of dissolute lives and women of spotted fame, wretches given over to all mean and filthy vice, and suspected even of horrid crimes. it was strange to see that the good shrank not from the wicked, nor were the sinners abashed by the saints. scattered also among their pale-faced enemies were the indian priests, or powwows, who had often scared their native forest with more hideous incantations than any known to english witchcraft."but where is faith?" thought goodman brown; and, as hope came into his heart, he trembled.another verse of the hymn arose, a slow and mournful strain, such as the pious love, but joined to words which expressed all that our nature can conceive of sin, and darkly hinted at far more. unfathomable to mere mortals is the lore of fiends. verse after verse was sung, and still the chorus of the desert swelled between like the deepest tone of a mighty organ; and with the final peal of that dreadful anthem there came a sound, as if the roaring wind, the rushing streams, the howling beasts, and every other voice of the unconcerted wilderness were mingling and according with the voice of guilty man in homage to the prince of all. the four blazing pines threw up a loftier flame, and obscurely discovered shapes and visages of horror on the smoke wreaths above the impious assembly. at the same moment the fire on the rock shot redly forth and formed a glowing arch above its base, where now appeared a figure. with reverence be it spoken, the figure bore no slight similitude, both in garb and manner, to some grave divine of the new england churches."bring forth the converts!" cried a voice that echoed through the field and rolled into the forest.at the word, goodman brown stepped forth from the shadow of the trees and approached the congregation, with whom he felt a loathful brotherhood by the sympathy of all that was wicked in his heart. he could have well-nigh sworn that the shape of his own dead father beckoned him to advance, looking downward from a smoke wreath, while a woman, with dim features of despair, threw out her hand to warn him back. was it his mother? but he had no power to retreat one step, nor to resist, even in thought, when the minister and good old deacon gookin seized his arms and led him to the blazing rock. thither came also the slender form of a veiled female, led between goody cloyse, that pious teacher of the catechism, and martha carrier, who had received the devil's promise to be queen of hell. a rampant hag was she. and there stood the proselytes beneath the canopy of fire."welcome, my children," said the dark figure, "to the communion of your race. ye have found thus young your nature and your destiny. my children, look behind you!"they turned; and flashing forth, as it were, in a sheet of flame, the fiend worshippers were seen; the smile of welcome gleamed darkly on every visage."there," resumed the sable form, "are all whom ye have reverenced from youth. ye deemed them holier than yourselves, and shrank from your own sin, contrasting it with their lives of righteousness and prayerful aspirations heavenward. yet here are they all in my worshipping assembly. this night it shall be granted you to know their secret deeds: how hoary-bearded elders of the church have whispered wanton words to the young maids of their households; how many a woman, eager for widows' weeds, has given her husband a drink at bedtime and let him sleep his last sleep in her bosom how beardless youths have made haste to inherit their fathers' wealth; and how fair damsels--blush not, sweet ones--have dug little graves in the carder, and bidden me, the sole guest, to an infant's funeral. by the sympathy of your human hearts for sin ye shall scent out all the places--whether in church, bed-chamber, street, field, or forest--where crime has been committed, and shall exult to behold the whole earth one stain of guilt, one mighty blood spot. far more than this. it shall be yours to penetrate, in every bosom, the deep mystery of sin, the fountain of all wicked arts, and which inexhaustibly supplies more evil impulses than human power--than my power at its utmost--can make manifest in deeds. and now, my children, look upon each other."they did so; and, by the blaze of the hell-kindled torches, the wretched man beheld his faith, and the wife her husband, trembling before that unhallowed altar."lo, there ye stand, my children," said the figure, in a deep and solemn tone, almost sad with its despairing awfulness, as if his once angelic nature could yet mourn for our miserable race. "depending upon one another's hearts, ye had still hoped that virtue were not all a dream. now are ye undeceived. evil is the nature of mankind. evil must be your only happiness. welcome again, my children, to the communion of your race.""welcome," repeated the fiend worshippers, in one cry of despair and triumph.and there they stood, the only pair, as it seemed, who were yet hesitating on the verge of wickedness in this dark world. a basin was hollowed, naturally, in the rock. did it contain water, reddened by the lurid light? or was it blood? or, perchance, a liquid flame? herein did the shape of evil dip his hand and prepare to lay the mark of baptism upon their foreheads, that they might be partakers of the mystery of sin, more conscious of the secret guilt of others, both in deed and thought, than they could now be of their own. the husband cast one look at his pale wife, and faith at him. what polluted wretches would the next glance show them to each other, shuddering alike at what they disclosed and what they saw!"faith! faith!" cried the husband, "look up to heaven, and resist the wicked one."whether faith obeyed he knew not. hardly had he spoken when he found himself amid calm night and solitude, listening to a roar of the wind which died heavily away through the forest. he staggered against the rock, and felt it chill and damp; while a hanging twig, that had been all on fire, besprinkled his cheek with the coldest dew.the next morning young goodman brown came slowly into the street of salem village, staring around him like a bewildered man. the good old minister was taking a walk along the graveyard to get an appetite for breakfast and meditate his sermon, and bestowed a blessing, as he passed, on goodman brown. he shrank from the venerable saint as if to avoid an anathema. old deacon gookin was at domestic worship, and the holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "what god cloth the wizard pray to?" quoth goodman brown. goody cloyse, that excellent old christian, stood in the early sunshine at her own lattice, catechizing a little girl who had brought her a pint of morning's milk. goodman brown snatched away the child as from the grasp of the fiend himself. turning the corner by the meetinghouse, he spied the head of faith, with the pink ribbons, gazing anxiously forth, and bursting into such joy at sight of him that she skipped along the street and almost kissed her husband before the whole village. but goodman brown looked sternly and sadly into her face, and passed on without a greeting.had goodman brown fallen asleep in the forest and only dreamed a wild dream of a witch-meeting?be it so if you will; but, alas! it was a dream of evil omen for young goodman brown. a stern, a sad, a darkly meditative, a distrustful, if not a desperate man did he become from the night of that fearful dream. on the sabbath day, when the congregation were singing a holy psalm, he could not listen because an anthem of sin rushed loudly upon his ear and drowned all the blessed strain. when the minister spoke from the pulpit with power and fervid eloquence, and, with his hand on the open bible, of the sacred truths of our religion, and of saint-like lives and triumphant deaths, and of future bliss or misery unutterable, then did goodman brown turn pale, dreading lest the roof should thunder down upon the gray blasphemer and his hearers. often, awaking suddenly at midnight, he shrank from the bosom of faith; and at morning or eventide, when the family knelt down at prayer, he scowled and muttered to himself, and gazed sternly at his wife, and turned away. and when he had lived long, and was borne to his grave a hoary corpse, followed by faith, an aged woman, and children and grandchildren, a goodly procession, besides neighbors not a few, they carved no hopeful verse upon his tombstone, for his dying hour was gloom.the most disreputable thing in yancey goree's law office was goree himself, sprawled in his creaky old arm-chair. the rickety little office, built of red brick, was set flush with the street -- the main street of the town of bethel.bethel rested upon the foot-hills of the blue ridge. above it the mountains were piled to the sky. far below it the turbid catawba gleamed yellow along its disconsolate valley.the june day was at its sultriest hour. bethel dozed in the tepid shade. trade was not. it was so still that goree, reclining in his chair, distinctly heard the clicking of the chips in the grand-jury room, where the "court- house gang" was playing poker. from the open back door of the office a well-worn path meandered across the grassy lot to the court-house. the treading out of that path had cost goree all he ever had -- first inheritance of a few thousand dollars, next the old family home, and, latterly the last shreds of his self-respect and manhood. the "gang" had cleaned him out. the broken gambler had turned drunkard and parasite; he had lived to see this day come when the men who had stripped him denied him a seat at the game. his word was no longer to be taken. the daily bouts at cards had arranged itself accordingly, and to him was assigned the ignoble part of the onlooker. the sheriff, the county clerk, a sportive deputy, a gay attorney, and a chalk-faced man hailing "from the valley," sat at table, and the sheared one was thus tacitly advised to go and grow more wool.soon wearying of his ostracism, goree had departed for his office, muttering to himself as he unsteadily traversed the unlucky pathway. after a drink of corn whiskey from a demijohn under the table, he had flung himself into the chair, staring, in a sort of maudlin apathy, out at the mountains immersed in the summer haze. the little white patch he saw away up on the side of blackjack was laurel, the village near which he had been born and bred. there, also, was the birthplace of the feud between the gorees and the coltranes. now no direct heir of the gorees survived except this plucked and singed bird of misfortune. to the coltranes, also, but one male supporter was left -- colonel abner coltrane, a man of substance and standing, a member of the state legislature, and a contemporary with goree's father. the feud had been a typical one of the region; it had left a red record of hate, wrong and slaughter. but yancey goree was not thinking of feuds. his befuddled brain was hopelessly attacking the problem of the future maintenance of himself and his favourite follies. of late, old friends of the family had seen to it that he had whereof to eat and a place to sleep -- but whiskey they would not buy for him, and he must have whiskey. his law business was extinct; no case had been intrusted to him in two years. he had been a borrower and a sponge, and it seemed that if he fell no lower it would be from lack of opportunity. one more chance -- he was saying to himself -- if he had one more stake at the game, he thought he could win; but he had nothing left to sell, and his credit was more than exhausted.he could not help smiling, even in his misery, as he thought of the man to whom, six months before, he had sold the old goree homestead. there had come from "back yan'" in the mountains two of the strangest creatures, a man named pike garvey and his wife. "back yan'," with a wave of the hand toward the hills, was understood among the mountaineers to designate the remotest fastnesses, the unplumbed gorges, the haunts of lawbreakers, the wolf's den, and the boudoir of the bear. in the cabin far up on blackjack's shoulder, in the wildest part of these retreats, this odd couple had lived for twenty years. they had neither dog nor children to mitigate the heavy silence of the hills. pike garvey was little known in the settlements, but all who had dealt with him pronounced him "crazy as a loon." he acknowledged no occupation save that of a squirrel hunter, but he "moonshined" occasionally by way of diversion. once the "revenues" had dragged him from his lair, fighting silently and desperately like a terrier, and he had been sent to state's prison for two years. released, he popped back into his hole like an angry weasel.fortune, passing over many anxious wooers, made a freakish flight into blackjack's bosky pockets to smile upon pike and his faithful partner.one day a party of spectacled, knickerbockered, and altogether absurd prospectors invaded the vicinity of the garvey's cabin. pike lifted his squirrel rifle off the hooks and took a shot at them at long range on the chance of their being revenues. happily he missed, and the unconscious agents of good luck drew nearer, disclosing their innocence of anything resembling law or justice. later on, they offered the garveys an enormous quantity of ready, green, crisp money for their thirty-acre patch of cleared land, mentioning, as an excuse for such a mad action, some irrelevant and inadequate nonsense about a bed of mica underlying the said property.when the garveys became possessed of so many dollars that they faltered in computing them, the deficiencies of life on blackjack began to grow prominent. pike began to talk of new shoes, a hogshead of tobacco to set in the corner, a new lock to his rifle; and, leading martella to a certain spot on the mountain-side, he pointed out to her how a small cannon -- doubtless a thing not beyond the scope of their fortune in price -- might be planted so as to command and defend the sole accessible trail to the cabin, to the confusion of revenues and meddling strangers forever.but adam reckoned without his eve. these things represented to him the applied power of wealth, but there slumbered in his dingy cabin an ambition that soared far above his primitive wants. somewhere in mrs. garvey's bosom still survived a spot of femininity unstarved by twenty years of blackjack. for so long a time the sounds in her ears had been the scaly-barks dropping in the woods at noon, and the wolves singing among the rocks at night, and it was enough to have purged her of vanities. she had grown fat and sad and yellow and dull. but when the means came, she felt a rekindled desire to assume the perquisites of her sex -- to sit at tea tables; to buy futile things; to whitewash the hideous veracity of life with a little form and ceremony. so she coldly vetoed pike's proposed system of fortifications, and announced that they would descend upon the world, and gyrate socially.and thus, at length, it was decided, and the thing done. the village of laurel was their compromise between mrs. garvey's preference for one of the large valley towns and pike's hankering for primeval solitudes. laurel yielded a halting round of feeble social distractions comportable with martella's ambitions, and was not entirely without recommendation to pike, its contiguity to the mountains presenting advantages for sudden retreat in case fashionable society should make it advisable.their descent upon laurel had been coincident with yancey goree's feverish desire to convert property into cash, and they bought the old goree homestead, paying four thousand dollars ready money into the spendthrift's shaking hands.thus it happened that while the disreputable last of the gorees sprawled in his disreputable office, at the end of his row, spurned by the cronies whom he had gorged, strangers dwelt in the halls of his fathers.a cloud of dust was rolling, slowly up the parched street, with something travelling in the midst of it. a little breeze wafted the cloud to one side, and a new, brightly painted carryall, drawn by a slothful gray horse, became visible. the vehicle deflected from the middle of the street as it neared goree's office, and stopped in the gutter directly in front of his door.on the front seat sat a gaunt, tall man, dressed in black broadcloth, his rigid hands incarcerated in yellow kid gloves. on the back seat was a lady who triumphed over the june heat. her stout form was armoured in a skintight silk dress of the description known as "changeable," being a gorgeous combination of shifting hues. she sat erect, waving a much-ornamented fan, with her eyes fixed stonily far down the street. however martella garvey's heart might be rejoicing at the pleasures of her new life, blackjack had done his work with her exterior. he had carved her countenance to the image of emptiness and inanity; had imbued her with the stolidity of his crags, and the reserve of his hushed interiors. she always seemed to hear, whatever her surroundings were, the scaly-barks falling and pattering down the mountainside. she could always hear the awful silence of blackjack sounding through the stillest of nights.goree watched this solemn equipage, as it drove to his door, with only faint interest; but when the lank driver wrapped the reins about his whip, awkwardly descended, and stepped into the office, he rose unsteadily to receive him, recognizing pike garvey, the new, the transformed, the recently civilized.the mountaineer took the chair goree offered him. they who cast doubts upon garvey's soundness of mind had a strong witness in the man's countenance. his face was too long, a dull saffron in hue, and immobile as a statue's. pale-blue, unwinking round eyes without lashes added to the singularity of his gruesome visage. goree was at a loss to account for the visit."everything all right at laurel, mr. garvey?" he inquired."everything all right, sir, and mighty pleased is missis garvey and me with the property. missis garvey likes yo' old place, and she likes the neighbourhood. society is what she 'lows she wants, and she is getting' of it. the rogerses, the hapgoods, the pratts and the troys hev been to see missis garvey, and she hev et meals to most of thar houses. the best folks hev axed her to differ'nt kinds of doin's. i cyan't say, mr. goree, that sech things suits me -- fur me, give me them thar." garvey's huge, yellow-gloved hand flourished in the direction of the mountains. "that's whar i b'long, 'mongst the wild honey bees and the b'ars. but that ain't what i come fur to say, mr. goree. thar's somethin' you got what me and missis garvey wants to buy.""buy!" echoed goree. "from me?" then he laughed harshly. "i reckon you are mistaken about that. i reckon you are mistaken about that. i sold out to you, as you yourself expressed it, 'lock, stock and barrel.' there isn't even a ramrod left to sell.""you've got it; and we 'uns want it. 'take the money,' says missis garvey, 'and buy it fa'r and squared'.'"goree shook his head. "the cupboard's bare," he said."we've riz," pursued the mountaineer, undetected from his object, "a heap. we was pore as possums, and now we could hev folks to dinner every day. we been recognized, missis garvey says, by the best society. but there's somethin' we need we ain't got. she says it ought to been put in the 'ventory ov the sale, but it tain't thar. 'take the money, then,' says she, 'and buy it fa'r and squar'."'"out with it," said goree, his racked nerves growing impatient.garvey threw his slouch bat upon the table, and leaned forward, fixing his unblinking eyes upon goree's."there's a old feud," he said distinctly and slowly, "'tween you 'uns and the coltranes."goree frowned ominously. to speak of his feud to a feudist is a serious breach of the mountain etiquette. the man from "back yan'" knew it as well as the lawyer did."na offense," he went on "but purely in the way of business. missis garvey hev studied all about feuds. most of the quality folks in the mountains hev 'em. the settles and the goforths, the rankins and the boyds, the silers and the galloways, hev all been cyarin' on feuds f'om twenty to a hundred year. the last man to drap was when yo' uncle, jedge paisley goree, 'journed co't and shot len coltrane f'om the bench. missis garvey and me, we come f'om the po' white trash. nobody wouldn't pick a feud with we 'uns, no mo'n with a fam'ly of tree-toads. quality people everywhar, says missis garvey, has feuds. we 'uns ain't quality, but we're uyin' into it as fur as we can. 'take the money, then,' says missis garvey, 'and buy mr. goree's feud, fa'r and squar'.'"the squirrel hunter straightened a leg half across the room, drew a roll of bills from his pocket, and threw them on the table."thar's two hundred dollars, mr. goree; what you would call a fa'r price for a feud that's been 'lowed to run down like yourn hev. thar's only you left to cyar' on yo' side of it, and you'd make mighty po' killin'. i'll take it off yo' hands, and it'll set me and missis garvey up among the quality. thar's the money."the little roll of currency on the table slowly untwisted itself, writhing and jumping as its folds relaxed. in the silence that followed garvey's last speech the rattling of the poker chips in the court-house could be plainly heard. goree knew that the sheriff had just won a pot, for the subdued whoop with which he always greeted a victory floated across the square upon the crinkly heat waves. beads of moisture stood on goree's brow. stooping, he drew the wicker-covered demijohn from under the table, and filled a tumbler from it."a little corn liquor, mr. garvey? of course you are joking about what you spoke of? opens quite a new market, doesn't it? feuds. prime, two-fifty to three. feuds, slightly damaged -- two hundred, i believe you said, mr. garvey?"goree laughed self-consciously.the mountaineer took the glass goree handed him, and drank the whisky without a tremor of the lids of his staring eyes. the lawyer applauded the feat by a look of envious admiration. he poured his own drink, and took it like a drunkard, by gulps, and with shudders at the smell and taste."two hundred," repeated garvey. "thar's the money."a sudden passion flared up in goree's brain. he struck the table with his fist. one of the bills flipped over and touched his hand. he flinched as if something had stung him."do you come to me," he shouted, "seriously with such a ridiculous, insulting, darned-fool proposition?""it's fa'r and squar'," said the squirrel hunter, but he reached out his hand as if to take back the money; and then goree knew that his own flurry of rage had not been from pride or resentment, but from anger at himself, knowing that he would set foot in the deeper depths that were being opened to him. he turned in an instant from an outraged gentleman to an anxious chafferer recommending his goods."don't be in a hurry, garvey," he said, his face crimson and his speech thick. "i accept your p-p-proposition, though it's dirt cheap at two hundred. a t-trade's all right when both p-purchaser and b-buyer are s-satisfied. shall i w-wrap it up for you, mr. garvey?"garvey rose, and shook out his broadcloth. "missis garvev will be pleased. you air out of it, and it stands coltrane and garvey. just a scrap ov writin', mr. goree, you bein' a lawyer, to show we traded."goree seized a sheet of paper and a pen. the money was clutched in his moist hand. everything else suddenly seemed to grow trivial and light."bill of sale, by all means. 'right, title, and interest in and to' . . . 'forever warrant and -- ' no, garvey, we'll have to leave out that 'defend,'" said goree with a loud laugh. "you'll have to defend this title yourself."the mountaineer received the amazing screed that the lawyer handed him, folded it with immense labour, and laced it carefully in his pocket.goree was standing near the window. "step here, said, raising his finger, "and i'll show you your recently purchased enemy. there he goes, down the other side of the street."the mountaineer crooked his long frame to look through the window in the direction indicated by the other. colonel abner coltrane, an erect, portly gentleman of about fifty, wearing the inevitable long, double-breasted frock coat of the southern lawmaker, and an old high silk hat, was passing on the opposite sidewalk. as garvey looked, goree glanced at his face. if there be such a thing as a yellow wolf, here was its counterpart. garvey snarled as his unhuman eyes followed the moving figure, disclosing long, amber-coloured fangs."is that him? why, that's the man who sent me to the penitentiary once!""he used to be district attorney," said goree carelessly. "and, by the way, he's a first-class shot.""i kin hit a squirrel's eye at a hundred yard," said garvey. "so that thar's coltrane! i made a better trade than i was thinkin'. i'll take keer ov this feud, mr. goree, better'n you ever did!"he moved toward the door, but lingered there, betraying a slight perplexity."anything else to-day?" inquired goree with frothy sarcasm. "any family traditions, ancestral ghosts, or skeletons in the closet? prices as low as the lowest.""thar was another thing," replied the unmoved squirrel hunter, "that missis garvey was thinkin' of. 'tain't so much in my line as t'other, but she wanted partic'lar that i should inquire, and ef you was willin', 'pay fur it,' she says, 'fa'r and squar'.' thar's a buryin' groun', as you know, mr. goree, in the yard of yo' old place, under the cedars. them that lies thar is yo' folks what was killed by the coltranes. the monyments has the names on 'em. missis garvev says a fam'ly buryin' groun'- is a sho' sign of quality. she says ef we git the feud thar's somethin' else ought to go with it. the names on them moiivments is 'goree,' but they can be changed to ourn by -- ""go. go!" screamed goree, his face turning purple. he stretched out both hands toward the mountaineer, his fingers hooked and shaking. "go, you ghoul! even a ch-chinaman protects the g-graves of his ancestors -- go!"the squirrel hunter slouched out of the door to his carryall. while he was climbing over the wheel goree was collecting, with feverish celerity, the money that had fallen from his hand to the floor. as the vehicle slowly turned about, the sheep, with a coat of newly grown wool, was hurrying, in indecent haste, along the path to the court-house.at three o'clock in the morning they brought him back to his office, shorn and unconscious. the sheriff, the sportive deputy, the county clerk, and the gay attorney carried him, the chalk-faced man "from the valley" acting as escort."on the table," said one of them, and they deposited him there among the litter of his unprofitable books and papers."yance thinks a lot of a pair of deuces when he's liquored up," sighed the sheriff reflectively."too much," said the gay attorney. "a man has no business to play poker who drinks as much as he does. i wonder how much he dropped to-night.""close to two hundred. what i wonder is whar he got it. yance ain't had a cent fur over a month, i know.""struck a client, maybe. well, let's get home before daylight. he'll be all right when he wakes up, except for a sort of beehive about the cranium."the gang slipped away through the early morning twilight. the next eye to gaze upon the miserable goree was the orb of day. he peered through the uncurtained window, first deluging the sleeper in a flood of faint gold, but soon pouring upon the mottled red of his flesh a searching, white, summer heat. goree stirred, half unconsciously, among the table's dã©bris, and turned his face from the window. his movement dislodged a heavy law book, which crashed upon the floor. opening his eyes, he saw, bending over him, a man in a black frock coat. looking higher, he discovered a well-worn silk hat, and beneath it the kindly, smooth face of colonel abner coltrane.a little uncertain of the outcome, the colonel waited for the other to make some sign of recognition. not in twenty years had male members of these two families faced each other in peace. goree's eyelids puckered as he strained his blurred sight toward this visitor, and then he smiled serenely."have you brought stella and lucy over to play?" he said calmly."do you know me, yancey?" asked coltrane."of course i do. you brought me a whip with a whistle in the end."so he had -- twenty-four years ago; when yancey's father was his best friend.goree's eyes wandered about the room. the colonel understood. "lie still, and i'll bring you some," said he. there was a pump in the yard at the rear, and goree closed his eyes, listening with rapture to the click of its handle, and the bubbling of the falling stream. coltrane brought a pitcher of the cool water, and held it for him to drink. presently goree sat up -- a most forlorn object, his summer suit of flax soiled and crumpled, his discreditable head tousled and unsteady. he tried to wave one of his hands toward the colonel."ex-excuse-everything, will you?" he said. "i must have drunk too much whiskey last night, and gone to bed on the table." his brows knitted into a puzzled frown."out with the boys awhile?" asked coltrane kindly."no, i went nowhere. i haven't had a dollar to spend in the last two months. struck the demijohn too often. i reckon, as usual."colonel coltrane touched him on the shoulder."a little while ago, yancey," he began, "you asked me if i had brought stella and lucy over to play. you weren't quite awake then, and must have been dreaming you were a boy again. you are awake now, and i want you to listen to me. i have come from stella and lucy to their old playmate, and to my old friend's son. they know that i am going to bring you home with me, and you will find them as ready with a welcome as they were in the old days. i want you to come to my house and stay until you are yourself again, and as much longer as you will. we heard of your being down in the world, and in the midst of temptation, and we agreed that you should come over and play at our house once more. will you come, my boy? will you drop our old family trouble and come with me?""trouble!" said goree, opening his eyes wide. "there was never any trouble between us that i know of. i'm sure we've always been the best friends. but, good lord, colonel, how could i go to your home as i am -- a drunken wretch, a miserable, degraded spendthrift and gambler -- "he lurched from the table into his armchair, and began to weep maudlin tears, mingled with genuine drops of remorse and shame. coltrane talked to him persistently and reasonably, reminding him of the simple mountain pleasures of which he had once been so fond, and insisting upon the genuineness of the invitation.finally he landed goree by telling him he was counting upon his help in the engineering and transportation of a large amount of felled timber from a high mountain-side to a waterway. he knew that goree had once invented a device for this purpose -- a series of slides and chutes- upon which he had justly prided himself. in an instant the poor fellow, delighted at the idea of his being of use to any one, had paper spread upon the table, and was drawing rapid but pitifully shaky lines in demonstration of what he could and would do.the man was sickened of the husks; his prodigal heart was turning again toward the mountains. his mind was yet strangely clogged, and his thoughts and memories were returning to his brain one by one, like carrier pigeons over a stormy sea. but coltrane was satisfied with the progress he had made.bethel received the surprise of its existence that afternoon when a coltrane and a goree rode amicably together through the town. side by side they rode, out from the dusty streets and gaping townspeople, down across the creek bridge, and up toward the mountain. the prodigal had brushed and washed and combed himself to a more decent figure, but he was unsteady in the saddle, and he seemed to be deep in the contemplation of some vexing problem. coltrane left him in his mood, relying upon the influence of changed surroundings to restore his equilibrium.once goree was seized with a shaking fit, and almost came to a collapse. he had to dismount and rest at the side of the road. the colonel, foreseeing such a condition, had provided a small flask of whisky for the journey but when it was offered to him goree refused it almost with violence, declaring he would never touch it again. by and by he was recovered, and went quietly enough for a mile or two. then he pulled up his horse suddenly, and said:"i lost two hundred dollars last night, playing poker. now, where did i get that money?""take it easy, yancey. the mountain air will soon clear it up. we'll go fishing, first thing, at the pinnacle falls. the trout are jumping there like bullfrogs. we'll take stella and lucy along, and have a picnic on eagle rock. have you forgotten how a hickory-cured-ham sandwich tastes, yancey, to a hungry fisherman?"evidently the colonel did not believe the story of his lost wealth; so goree retired again into brooding silence.by late afternoon they had travelled ten of the twelve miles between bethel and laurel. half a mile this side of laurel lay the old goree place; a mile or two beyond the village lived the coltranes. the road was now steep and laborious, but the compensations were many. the tilted aisles of the forest were opulent with leaf and bird and bloom. the tonic air put to shame the pharmacopã¦ia. the glades were dark with mossy shade, and bright with shy rivulets winking from the ferns and laurels. on the lower side they viewed, framed in the near foilage, exquisite sketches of the far valley swooning in its opal haze.coltrane was pleased to see that his companion was yielding to the spell of the hills and woods. for now they had but to skirt the base of painter's cliff; to cross elder branch and mount the hill beyond, and goree would have to face the squandered home of his fathers. every rock he passed, every tree, every foot of the rocky way, was familiar to him. though he hid forgotten the woods, they thrilled him like the music of "home, sweet home."they rounded the cliff, decended into elder branch, and paused there to let the horses drink and splash in the swift water. on the right was a rail fence that cornered there, and followed the road and stream. inclosed by it was the old apple orchard of the home place; the house was yet concealed by the brow of the steep hill. inside and along the fence, pokeberries, elders, sassafras, and sumac grew high and dense. at a rustle of their branches, both goree and coltrane glanced up, and saw a long, yellow, wolfish face above the fence, staring at them with pale, unwinking eyes. the head quickly disappeared; there was a violent swaying of the bushes, and an ungainly figure ran up through the apple orchard in the direction of the house, zigzagging among the trees."that's garvey," said coltrane; "the man you sold out to. there's no doubt but he's considerably cracked. i had to send him up for moonshining, once, several years ago, in spite of the fact that i believed him irresponsible. why, what's the matter, yancey?"goree was wiping his forehead, and his face had lost its colour. "do i look queer, too?" he asked, trying to smile. "i'm just remembering a few more things." some of the alcohol had evaporated from his brain. "i recollect now where i got that two hundred dollars.""don't think of it," said coltrane cheerfully. "later on we'll figure it all out together."they rode out of the branch, and when they reached the foot of the hill goree stopped again."did you ever suspect i was a very vain kind of fellow, colonel" he asked. "sort of foolish proud about appearances?"the colonel's eyes refused to wander to the soiled, sagging suit of flax and the faded slouch hat."it seems to me," he replied, mystified, but humouring him, "i remember a young buck about twenty, with the tightest coat, the sleekest hair, and the prancingest saddle horse in the blue ridge.""right you are," said goree eagerly. "and it's in me yet, though it don't show. oh, i'm as vain as a turkey gobbler, and as proud as lucifer. i'm going to ask you to indulge this weakness of mine in a little matter.""speak out, yancey. we'll create you duke of laurel and baron of blue ridge, if you choose; and you shall have a feather out of stella's peacock's tail to wear in your hat.""i'm in earnest. in a few minutes we'll pass the house up there on the hill where i was born, and where my people have lived for nearly a century. strangers live there now -- and look at me! i am about to show myself to them ragged and poverty-stricken, a wastrel and a beggar. colonel coltrane, i'm ashamed to do it. i want you to let me wear your coat and hat until we are out of sight beyond. i know you think it a foolish pride, but i want to make as good a showing as i can when i pass the old place.""now, what does this mean?" said coltrane to himself, as he compared his companion's sane looks and quiet demeanour with his strange request. but he was already unbuttoning the coat, assenting readily, as if the fancy were in no wise to be considered strange.the coat and hat fitted goree well. he buttoned the former about him with a look of satisfaction and dignity. he and coltrane were nearly the same size -- rather tall, portly, and erect. twenty-five years were between them, but in appearance they might have been brothers. goree looked older than his age; his face was puffy and lined; the colonel had the smooth, fresh complexion of a temperate liver. he put on goree's disreputable old flax coat and faded slouch hat."now," said goree, taking up the reins, "i'm all right. i want you to ride about ten feet in the rear as we go by, colonel, so that they can get a good look at me. they'll see i'm no back number yet, by any means. i guess i'll show up pretty well to them once more, anyhow. let's ride on."he set out up the hill at a smart trot, the colonel following, as he had been requested.goree sat straight in the saddle, with head erect, but his eyes were turned to the right, sharply scanning every shrub and fence and hiding-place in the old homestead yard. once he muttered to himself, "will the crazy fool try it, or did i dream half of it?"it was when he came opposite the little family burying ground that he saw what he had been looking for -- a puff of white smoke, coming from the thick cedars in one corner. he toppled so slowly to the left that coltrane had time to urge his horse to that side, and catch him with one arm.the squirrel hunter had not overpraised his aim. he had sent the bullet where he intended, and where goree had expected that it would pass - through the breast of colonel abner coltrane's black frock coat.goree leaned heavily against coltrane, but he did not fall. the horses kept pace, side by side, and the colonel's arm kept him steady. the little white houses of laurel shone through the trees, half a mile away. goree reached out one hand and groped until it rested upon coltrane's fingers, which held his bridle."good friend," he said, and that was all.thus did yancey goree, as be rode past his old home, make, considering all things, the best showing that was in his power.every saturday night the clover leaf social club gave a hop in the hall of the give and take athletic association on the east side. in order to attend one of these dances you must be a member of the give and take--or, if you belong to the division that starts off with the right foot in waltzing, you must work in rhinegold's paper-box factory. still, any clover leaf was privileged to escort or be escorted by an outsider to a single dance. but mostly each give and take brought the paper-box girl that he affected; and few strangers could boast of having shaken a foot at the regular hops.maggie toole, on account of her dull eyes, broad mouth and left- handed style of footwork in the twostep, went to the dances with anna mccarty and her "fellow." anna and maggie worked side by side in the factory, and were the greatest chums ever. so anna always made jimmy burns take her by maggie's house every saturday night so that her friend could go to the dance with them.the give and take athletic association lived up to its name. the hall of the association in orchard street was fitted out with muscle-making inventions. with the fibres thus builded up the members were wont to engage the police and rival social and athletic organisations in joyous combat. between these more serious occupations the saturday night hop with the paper-box factory girls came as a refining influence and as an efficient screen. for sometimes the tip went 'round, and if you were among the elect that tiptoed up the dark back stairway you might see as neat and satisfying a little welter-weight affair to a finish as ever happened inside the ropes.on saturdays rhinegold's paper-box factory closed at 3 p. m. on one such afternoon anna and maggie walked homeward together. at maggie's door anna said, as usual: "be ready at seven, sharp, mag; and jimmy and we'll come by for you."but what was this? instead of the customary humble and grateful thanks from the non-escorted one there was to be perceived a high- poised head, a prideful dimpling at the corners of a broad mouth, and almost a sparkle in a dull brown eye."thanks, anna," said maggie; "but you and jimmy needn't bother to-night. i've a gentleman friend that's coming 'round to escort me to the hop."the comely anna pounced upon her friend, shook her, chided and beseeched her. maggie toole catch a fellow! plain, dear, loyal, unattractive maggie, so sweet as a chum, so unsought for a two-step or a moonlit bench in the little park. how was it? when did it happen? who was it?"you'll see to-night," said maggie, flushed with the wine of the first grapes she had gathered in cupid's vineyard. "he's swell all right. he's two inches taller than jimmy, and an up-to-date dresser. i'll introduce him, anna, just as soon as we get to the hall."anna and jimmy were among the first clover leafs to arrive that evening. anna's eyes were brightly fixed upon the door of the hall to catch the first glimpse of her friend's "catch."at 8:30 miss toole swept into the hall with her escort. quickly her triumphant eye discovered her chum under the wing of her faithful jimmy."oh, gee!" cried anna, "mag ain't made a hit--oh, no! swell fellow? well, i guess! style? look at 'um.""go as far as you like," said jimmy, with sandpaper in his voice. "cop him out if you want him. these new guys always win out with the push. don't mind me. he don't squeeze all the limes, i guess. huh!""shut up, jimmy. you know what i mean. i'm glad for mag. first fellow she ever had. oh, here they come."across the floor maggie sailed like a coquettish yacht convoyed by a stately cruiser. and truly, her companion justified the encomiums of the faithful chum. he stood two inches taller than the average give and take athlete; his dark hair curled; his eyes and his teeth flashed whenever he bestowed his frequent smiles. the young men of the clover leaf club pinned not their faith to the graces of person as much as they did to its prowess, its achievements in hand-to-hand conflicts, and its preservation from the legal duress that constantly menaced it. the member of the association who would bind a paperbox maiden to his conquering chariot scorned to employ beau brummel airs. they were not considered honourable methods of warfare. the swelling biceps, the coat straining at its buttons over the chest, the air of conscious conviction of the supereminence of the male in the cosmogony of creation, even a calm display of bow legs as subduing and enchanting agents in the gentle tourneys of cupid--these were the approved arms and ammunition of the clover leaf gallants. they viewed, then, genuflexions and alluring poses of this visitor with their chins at a new angle."a friend of mine, mr. terry o'sullivan," was maggie's formula of introduction. she led him around the room, presenting him to each new-arriving clover leaf. almost was she pretty now, with the unique luminosity in her eyes that comes to a girl with her first suitor and a kitten with its first mouse."maggie toole's got a fellow at last," was the word that went round among the paper-box girls. "pipe mag's floor-walker"--thus the give and takes expressed their indifferent contempt.usually at the weekly hops maggie kept a spot on the wall warm with her back. she felt and showed so much gratitude whenever a self- sacrificing partner invited her to dance that his pleasure was cheapened and diminished. she had even grown used to noticing anna joggle the reluctant jimmy with her elbow as a signal for him to invite her chum to walk over his feet through a two-step.but to-night the pumpkin had turned to a coach and six. terry o'sullivan was a victorious prince charming, and maggie toole winged her first butterfly flight. and though our tropes of fairyland be mixed with those of entomology they shall not spill one drop of ambrosia from the rose-crowned melody of maggie's one perfect night.the girls besieged her for introductions to her "fellow." the clover leaf young men, after two years of blindness, suddenly perceived charms in miss toole. they flexed their compelling muscles before her and bespoke her for the dance.thus she scored; but to terry o'sullivan the honours of the evening fell thick and fast. he shook his curls; he smiled and went easily through the seven motions for acquiring grace in your own room before an open window ten minutes each day. he danced like a faun; he introduced manner and style and atmosphere; his words came trippingly upon his tongue, and--he waltzed twice in succession with the paper- box girl that dempsey donovan brought.dempsey was the leader of the association. he wore a dress suit, and could chin the bar twice with one hand. he was one of "big mike" o'sullivan's lieutenants, and was never troubled by trouble. no cop dared to arrest him. whenever be broke a pushcart man's head or shot a member of the heinrick b. sweeney outing and literary association in the kneecap, an officer would drop around and say:"the cap'n 'd like to see ye a few minutes round to the office whin ye have time, dempsey, me boy."but there would be sundry gentlemen there with large gold fob chains and black cigars; and somebody would tell a funny story, and then dempsey would go back and work half an hour with the sixpound dumbbells. so, doing a tight-rope act on a wire stretched across niagara was a safe terpsichorean performance compared with waltzing twice with dempsey donovan's paper-box girl. at 10 o'clock the jolly round face of "big mike" o'sullivan shone at the door for five minutes upon the scene. he always looked in for five minutes, smiled at the girls and handed out real perfectos to the delighted boys.dempsey donovan was at his elbow instantly, talking rapidly. "big mike" looked carefully at the dancers, smiled, shook his head and departed.the music stopped. the dancers scattered to the chairs along the walls. terry o'sullivan, with his entrancing bow, relinquished a pretty girl in blue to her partner and started back to find maggie. dempsey intercepted him in the middle of the floor.some fine instinct that rome must have bequeathed to us caused nearly every one to turn and look at them--there was a subtle feeling that two gladiators had met in the arena. two or three give and takes with tight coat sleeves drew nearer."one moment, mr. o'sullivan," said dempsey. "i hope you're enjoying yourself. where did you say you live?"the two gladiators were well matched. dempsey had, perhaps, ten pounds of weight to give away. the o'sullivan had breadth with quickness. dempsey had a glacial eye, a dominating slit of a mouth, an indestructible jaw, a complexion like a belle's and the coolness of a champion. the visitor showed more fire in his contempt and less control over his conspicuous sneer. they were enemies by the law written when the rocks were molten. they were each too splendid, too mighty, too incomparable to divide pre-eminence. one only must survive."i live on grand," said o'sullivan, insolently; "and no trouble to find me at home. where do you live?"dempsey ignored the question."you say your name's o'sullivan," he went on. "well, 'big mike' says he never saw you before.""lots of things he never saw," said the favourite of the hop."as a rule," went on dempsey, huskily sweet, "o'sullivans in this district know one another. you escorted one of our lady members here, and we want chance to make good. if you've got a family tree let's see a few historical o'sullivan buds come out on it. or do you want us to dig it out of you by the roots?""suppose you mind your own business," suggested o'sullivan, blandly.dempsey's eye brightened. he held up an inspired forefinger as though a brilliant idea had struck him."i've got it now," he said cordially. "it was just a little mistake. you ain't no o'sullivan. you are a ring-tailed monkey. excuse us for not recognising you at first."o'sullivan's eye flashed. he made a quick movement, but andy geoghan was ready and caught his arm.dempsey nodded at andy and william mcmahan, the secretary of the club, and walked rapidly toward a door at the rear of the hall. two other members of the give and take association swiftly joined the little group. terry o'sullivan was now in the hands of the board of rules and social referees. they spoke to him briefly and softly, and conducted him out through the same door at the rear.this movement on the part of the clover leaf members requires a word of elucidation. back of the association hall was a smaller room rented by the club. in this room personal difficulties that arose on the ballroom floor were settled, man to man, with the weapons of nature, under the supervision of the board. no lady could say that she had witnessed a fight at a clover leaf hop in several years. its gentlemen members guaranteed that.so easily and smoothly had dempsey and the board done their preliminary work that many in the hall had not noticed the checking of the fascinating o'sullivan's social triumph. among these was maggie. she looked about for her escort."smoke up!" said rose cassidy. "wasn't you on? demps donovan picked a scrap with your lizzie-boy, and they've waltzed out to the slaughter room with him. how's my hair look done up this way, mag?"maggie laid a hand on the bosom of her cheesecloth waist."gone to fight with dempsey!" she said, breathlessly. "they've got to be stopped. dempsey donovan can't fight him. why, he'll--he'll kill him!""ah, what do you care?" said rosa. "don't some of 'em fight every hop?"but maggie was off, darting her zig-zag way through the maze of dancers. she burst through the rear door into the dark hall and then threw her solid shoulder against the door of the room of single combat. it gave way, and in the instant that she entered her eye caught the scene--the board standing about with open watches; dempsey donovan in his shirt sleeves dancing, light-footed, with the wary grace of the modern pugilist, within easy reach of his adversary; terry o'sullivan standing with arms folded and a murderous look in his dark eyes. and without slacking the speed of her entrance she leaped forward with a scream--leaped in time to catch and hang upon the arm of o'sullivan that was suddenly uplifted, and to whisk from it the long, bright stiletto that he had drawn from his bosom.the knife fell and rang upon the floor. cold steel drawn in the rooms of the give and take association! such a thing had never happened before. every one stood motionless for a minute. andy geoghan kicked the stiletto with the toe of his shoe curiously, like an antiquarian who has come upon some ancient weapon unknown to his learning.and then o'sullivan hissed something unintelligible between his teeth. dempsey and the board exchanged looks. and then dempsey looked at o'sullivan without anger, as one looks at a stray dog, and nodded his head in the direction of the door."the back stairs, giuseppi," he said, briefly. "somebody'll pitch your hat down after you."maggie walked up to dempsey donovan. there was a brilliant spot of red in her cheeks, down which slow tears were running. but she looked him bravely in the eye."i knew it, dempsey," she said, as her eyes grew dull even in their tears. "i knew he was a guinea. his name's tony spinelli. i hurried in when they told me you and him was scrappin'. them guineas always carries knives. but you don't understand, dempsey. i never had a fellow in my life. i got tired of comin' with anna and jimmy every night, so i fixed it with him to call himself o'sullivan, and brought him along. i knew there'd be nothin' doin' for him if he came as a dago. i guess i'll resign from the club now."dempsey turned to andy geoghan."chuck that cheese slicer out of the window," he said, "and tell 'em inside that mr. o'sullivan has had a telephone message to go down to tammany hall."and then he turned back to maggie."say, mag," he said, "i'll see you home. and how about next saturday night? will you come to the hop with me if i call around for you?"it was remarkable how quickly maggie's eyes could change from dull to a shining brown."with you, dempsey?" she stammered. "say--will a duck swim?"one dollar and eighty-seven cents. that was all. and sixty cents of it was in pennies. pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the grocer and the vegetable man and the butcher until one's cheeks burned with the silent imputation of parsimony that such close dealing implied. three times della counted it. one dollar and eighty-seven cents. and the next day would be christmas.there was clearly nothing left to do but flop down on the shabby little couch and howl. so della did it. which instigates the moral reflection that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.while the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first stage to the second, take a look at the home. a furnished flat at $8 per week. it did not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had that word on the look-out for the mendicancy squad.in the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go, and an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring. also appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name "mr. james dillingham young."the "dillingham" had been flung to the breeze during a former period of prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. now, when the income was shrunk to $20, the letters of "dillingham" looked blurred, as though they were thinking seriously of contracting to a modest and unassuming d. but whenever mr. james dillingham young came home and reached his flat above he was called "jim" and greatly hugged by mrs. james dillingham young, already introduced to you as della. which is all very good.della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag. she stood by the window and looked out dully at a grey cat walking a grey fence in a grey backyard. to-morrow would be christmas day, and she had only $1.87 with which to buy jim a present. she had been saving every penny she could for months, with this result. twenty dollars a week doesn't go far. expenses had been greater than she had calculated. they always are. only $1.87 to buy a present for jim. her jim. many a happy hour she had spent planning for something nice for him. something fine and rare and sterling--something just a little bit near to being worthy of the honour of being owned by jim.there was a pier-glass between the windows of the room. perhaps you have seen a pier-glass in an $8 flat. a very thin and very agile person may, by observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal strips, obtain a fairly accurate conception of his looks. della, being slender, had mastered the art.suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. her eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its colour within twenty seconds. rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its full length.now, there were two possessions of the james dillingham youngs in which they both took a mighty pride. one was jim's gold watch that had been his father's and his grandfather's. the other was della's hair. had the queen of sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, della would have let her hair hang out of the window some day to dry just to depreciate her majesty's jewels and gifts. had king solomon been the janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the basement, jim would have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to see him pluck at his beard from envy.so now della's beautiful hair fell about her, rippling and shining like a cascade of brown waters. it reached below her knee and made itself almost a garment for her. and then she did it up again nervously and quickly. once she faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or two splashed on the worn red carpet.on went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. with a whirl of skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she cluttered out of the door and down the stairs to the street.where she stopped the sign read: "mme sofronie. hair goods of all kinds." one eight up della ran, and collected herself, panting. madame, large, too white, chilly, hardly looked the "sofronie.""will you buy my hair?" asked della."i buy hair," said madame. "take yer hat off and let's have a sight at the looks of it."down rippled the brown cascade."twenty dollars," said madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand."give it to me quick" said della.oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. forget the hashed metaphor. she was ransacking the stores for jim's present.she found it at last. it surely had been made for jim and no one else. there was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all of them inside out. it was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious ornamentation--as all good things should do. it was even worthy of the watch. as soon as she saw it she knew that it must be jim's. it was like him. quietness and value--the description applied to both. twenty-one dollars they took from her for it, and she hurried home with the 78 cents. with that chain on his watch jim might be properly anxious about the time in any company. grand as the watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the old leather strap that he used in place of a chain.when della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence and reason. she got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went to work repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. which is always a tremendous task dear friends--a mammoth task.within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, close-lying curls that made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. she looked at her reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically."if jim doesn't kill me," she said to herself, "before he takes a second look at me, he'll say i look like a coney island chorus girl. but what could i do--oh! what could i do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents?"at 7 o'clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.jim was never late. della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on the corner of the table near the door that he always entered. then she heard his step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she turned white for just a moment. she had a habit of saying little silent prayers about the simplest everyday things, and now she whispered: "please, god, make him think i am still pretty."the door opened and jim stepped in and closed it. he looked thin and very serious. poor fellow, he was only twenty-two--and to be burdened with a family! he needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.jim stepped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of quail. his eyes were fixed upon della, and there was an expression in them that she could not read, and it terrified her. it was not anger, nor surprise, nor disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments that she had been prepared for. he simply stared at her fixedly with that peculiar expression on his face.della wriggled off the table and went for him."jim, darling," she cried, "don't look at me that way. i had my hair cut off and sold it because i couldn't have lived through christmas without giving you a present. it'll grow out again--you won't mind, will you? i just had to do it. my hair grows awfully fast. say 'merry christmas!' jim, and let's be happy. you don't know what a nice-what a beautiful, nice gift i've got for you.""you've cut off your hair?" asked jim, laboriously, as if he had not arrived at that patent fact yet, even after the hardest mental labour."cut it off and sold it," said della. "don't you like me just as well, anyhow? i'm me without my hair, ain't i?"jim looked about the room curiously."you say your hair is gone?" he said, with an air almost of idiocy."you needn't look for it," said della. "it's sold, i tell you--sold and gone, too. it's christmas eve, boy. be good to me, for it went for you. maybe the hairs of my head were numbered," she went on with a sudden serious sweetness, "but nobody could ever count my love for you. shall i put the chops on, jim?"out of his trance jim seemed quickly to wake. he enfolded his della. for ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in the other direction. eight dollars a week or a million a year--what is the difference? a mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. the magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. this dark assertion will be illuminated later on.jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the table."don't make any mistake, dell," he said, "about me. i don't think there's anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could make me like my girl any less. but if you'll unwrap that package you may see why you had me going a while at first."white fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. and then an ecstatic scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers of the lord of the flat.for there lay the combs--the set of combs, side and back, that della had worshipped for long in a broadway window. beautiful combs, pure tortoise-shell, with jewelled rims--just the shade to wear in the beautiful vanished hair. they were expensive combs, she knew, and her heart had simply craved and yearned over them without the least hope of possession. and now, they were hers, but the tresses that should have adorned the coveted adornments were gone.but she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up with dim eyes and a smile and say: "my hair grows so fast, jim!"and then della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, "oh, oh!"jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. she held it out to him eagerly upon her open palm. the dull precious metal seemed to flash with a reflection of her bright and ardent spirit."isn't it a dandy, jim? i hunted all over town to find it. you'll have to look at the time a hundred times a day now. give me your watch. i want to see how it looks on it."instead of obeying, jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hands under the back of his head and smiled."dell," said he, "let's put our christmas presents away and keep 'em a while. they're too nice to use just at present. i sold the watch to get the money to buy your combs. and now suppose you put the chops on."the magi, as you know, were wise men--wonderfully wise men-who brought gifts to the babe in the manger. they invented the art of giving christmas presents. being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones, possibly bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. and here i have lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their house. but in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were the wisest. of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest. everywhere they are wisest. they are the magi.in a little district west of washington square the streets have run crazy and broken themselves into small strips called "places." these "places" make strange angles and curves. one street crosses itself a time or two. an artist once discovered a valuable possibility in this street. suppose a collector with a bill for paints, paper and canvas should, in traversing this route, suddenly meet himself coming back, without a cent having been paid on account!so, to quaint old greenwich village the art people soon came prowling, hunting for north windows and eighteenth-century gables and dutch attics and low rents. then they imported some pewter mugs and a chafing dish or two from sixth avenue, and became a "colony."at the top of a squatty, three-story brick sue and johnsy had their studio. "johnsy" was familiar for joanna. one was from maine; the other from california. they had met at the table d'hã´te of an eighth street "delmonico's," and found their tastes in art, chicory salad and bishop sleeves so congenial that the joint studio resulted.that was in may. in november a cold, unseen stranger, whom the doctors called pneumonia, stalked about the colony, touching one here and there with his icy fingers. over on the east side this ravager strode boldly, smiting his victims by scores, but his feet trod slowly through the maze of the narrow and moss-grown "places."mr. pneumonia was not what you would call a chivalric old gentleman. a mite of a little woman with blood thinned by california zephyrs was hardly fair game for the red-fisted, short-breathed old duffer. but johnsy he smote; and she lay, scarcely moving, on her painted iron bedstead, looking through the small dutch window-panes at the blank side of the next brick house.one morning the busy doctor invited sue into the hallway with a shaggy, gray eyebrow."she has one chance in - let us say, ten," he said, as he shook down the mercury in his clinical thermometer. " and that chance is for her to want to live. this way people have of lining-u on the side of the undertaker makes the entire pharmacopoeia look silly. your little lady has made up her mind that she's not going to get well. has she anything on her mind?""she - she wanted to paint the bay of naples some day." said sue."paint? - bosh! has she anything on her mind worth thinking twice - a man for instance?""a man?" said sue, with a jew's-harp twang in her voice. "is a man worth - but, no, doctor; there is nothing of the kind.""well, it is the weakness, then," said the doctor. "i will do all that science, so far as it may filter through my efforts, can accomplish. but whenever my patient begins to count the carriages in her funeral procession i subtract 50 per cent from the curative power of medicines. if you will get her to ask one question about the new winter styles in cloak sleeves i will promise you a one-in-five chance for her, instead of one in ten."after the doctor had gone sue went into the workroom and cried a japanese napkin to a pulp. then she swaggered into johnsy's room with her drawing board, whistling ragtime.johnsy lay, scarcely making a ripple under the bedclothes, with her face toward the window. sue stopped whistling, thinking she was asleep.she arranged her board and began a pen-and-ink drawing to illustrate a magazine story. young artists must pave their way to art by drawing pictures for magazine stories that young authors write to pave their way to literature.as sue was sketching a pair of elegant horseshow riding trousers and a monocle of the figure of the hero, an idaho cowboy, she heard a low sound, several times repeated. she went quickly to the bedside.johnsy's eyes were open wide. she was looking out the window and counting - counting backward."twelve," she said, and little later "eleven"; and then "ten," and "nine"; and then "eight" and "seven", almost together.sue look solicitously out of the window. what was there to count? there was only a bare, dreary yard to be seen, and the blank side of the brick house twenty feet away. an old, old ivy vine, gnarled and decayed at the roots, climbed half way up the brick wall. the cold breath of autumn had stricken its leaves from the vine until its skeleton branches clung, almost bare, to the crumbling bricks."what is it, dear?" asked sue."six," said johnsy, in almost a whisper. "they're falling faster now. three days ago there were almost a hundred. it made my head ache to count them. but now it's easy. there goes another one. there are only five left now.""five what, dear? tell your sudie.""leaves. on the ivy vine. when the last one falls i must go, too. i've known that for three days. didn't the doctor tell you?""oh, i never heard of such nonsense," complained sue, with magnificent scorn. "what have old ivy leaves to do with your getting well? and you used to love that vine so, you naughty girl. don't be a goosey. why, the doctor told me this morning that your chances for getting well real soon were - let's see exactly what he said - he said the chances were ten to one! why, that's almost as good a chance as we have in new york when we ride on the street cars or walk past a new building. try to take some broth now, and let sudie go back to her drawing, so she can sell the editor man with it, and buy port wine for her sick child, and pork chops for her greedy self.""you needn't get any more wine," said johnsy, keeping her eyes fixed out the window. "there goes another. no, i don't want any broth. that leaves just four. i want to see the last one fall before it gets dark. then i'll go, too.""johnsy, dear," said sue, bending over her, "will you promise me to keep your eyes closed, and not look out the window until i am done working? i must hand those drawings in by to-morrow. i need the light, or i would draw the shade down.""couldn't you draw in the other room?" asked johnsy, coldly."i'd rather be here by you," said sue. "beside, i don't want you to keep looking at those silly ivy leaves.""tell me as soon as you have finished," said johnsy, closing her eyes, and lying white and still as fallen statue, "because i want to see the last one fall. i'm tired of waiting. i'm tired of thinking. i want to turn loose my hold on everything, and go sailing down, down, just like one of those poor, tired leaves.""try to sleep," said sue. "i must call behrman up to be my model for the old hermit miner. i'll not be gone a minute. don't try to move 'til i come back."old behrman was a painter who lived on the ground floor beneath them. he was past sixty and had a michael angelo's moses beard curling down from the head of a satyr along with the body of an imp. behrman was a failure in art. forty years he had wielded the brush without getting near enough to touch the hem of his mistress's robe. he had been always about to paint a masterpiece, but had never yet begun it. for several years he had painted nothing except now and then a daub in the line of commerce or advertising. he earned a little by serving as a model to those young artists in the colony who could not pay the price of a professional. he drank gin to excess, and still talked of his coming masterpiece. for the rest he was a fierce little old man, who scoffed terribly at softness in any one, and who regarded himself as especial mastiff-in-waiting to protect the two young artists in the studio above.sue found behrman smelling strongly of juniper berries in his dimly lighted den below. in one corner was a blank canvas on an easel that had been waiting there for twenty-five years to receive the first line of the masterpiece. she told him of johnsy's fancy, and how she feared she would, indeed, light and fragile as a leaf herself, float away, when her slight hold upon the world grew weaker.old behrman, with his red eyes plainly streaming, shouted his contempt and derision for such idiotic imaginings."vass!" he cried. "is dere people in de world mit der foolishness to die because leafs dey drop off from a confounded vine? i haf not heard of such a thing. no, i will not bose as a model for your fool hermit-dunderhead. vy do you allow dot silly pusiness to come in der brain of her? ach, dot poor leetle miss yohnsy.""she is very ill and weak," said sue, "and the fever has left her mind morbid and full of strange fancies. very well, mr. behrman, if you do not care to pose for me, you needn't. but i think you are a horrid old - old flibbertigibbet.""you are just like a woman!" yelled behrman. "who said i will not bose? go on. i come mit you. for half an hour i haf peen trying to say dot i am ready to bose. gott! dis is not any blace in which one so goot as miss yohnsy shall lie sick. some day i vill baint a masterpiece, and ve shall all go away. gott! yes."johnsy was sleeping when they went upstairs. sue pulled the shade down to the window-sill, and motioned behrman into the other room. in there they peered out the window fearfully at the ivy vine. then they looked at each other for a moment without speaking. a persistent, cold rain was falling, mingled with snow. behrman, in his old blue shirt, took his seat as the hermit miner on an upturned kettle for a rock.when sue awoke from an hour's sleep the next morning she found johnsy with dull, wide-open eyes staring at the drawn green shade."pull it up; i want to see," she ordered, in a whisper.wearily sue obeyed.but, lo! after the beating rain and fierce gusts of wind that had endured through the livelong night, there yet stood out against the brick wall one ivy leaf. it was the last one on the vine. still dark green near its stem, with its serrated edges tinted with the yellow of dissolution and decay, it hung bravely from the branch some twenty feet above the ground."it is the last one," said johnsy. "i thought it would surely fall during the night. i heard the wind. it will fall to-day, and i shall die at the same time.""dear, dear!" said sue, leaning her worn face down to the pillow, "think of me, if you won't think of yourself. what would i do?"but johnsy did not answer. the lonesomest thing in all the world is a soul when it is making ready to go on its mysterious, far journey. the fancy seemed to possess her more strongly as one by one the ties that bound her to friendship and to earth were loosed.the day wore away, and even through the twilight they could see the lone ivy leaf clinging to its stem against the wall. and then, with the coming of the night the north wind was again loosed, while the rain still beat against the windows and pattered down from the low dutch eaves.when it was light enough johnsy, the merciless, commanded that the shade be raised.the ivy leaf was still there.johnsy lay for a long time looking at it. and then she called to sue, who was stirring her chicken broth over the gas stove."i've been a bad girl, sudie," said johnsy. "something has made that last leaf stay there to show me how wicked i was. it is a sin to want to die. you may bring a me a little broth now, and some milk with a little port in it, and - no; bring me a hand-mirror first, and then pack some pillows about me, and i will sit up and watch you cook."and hour later she said:"sudie, some day i hope to paint the bay of naples."the doctor came in the afternoon, and sue had an excuse to go into the hallway as he left."even chances," said the doctor, taking sue's thin, shaking hand in his. "with good nursing you'll win." and now i must see another case i have downstairs. behrman, his name is - some kind of an artist, i believe. pneumonia, too. he is an old, weak man, and the attack is acute. there is no hope for him; but he goes to the hospital to-day to be made more comfortable."the next day the doctor said to sue: "she's out of danger. you won. nutrition and care now - that's all."and that afternoon sue came to the bed where johnsy lay, contentedly knitting a very blue and very useless woollen shoulder scarf, and put one arm around her, pillows and all."i have something to tell you, white mouse," she said. "mr. behrman died of pneumonia to-day in the hospital. he was ill only two days. the janitor found him the morning of the first day in his room downstairs helpless with pain. his shoes and clothing were wet through and icy cold. they couldn't imagine where he had been on such a dreadful night. and then they found a lantern, still lighted, and a ladder that had been dragged from its place, and some scattered brushes, and a palette with green and yellow colors mixed on it, and - look out the window, dear, at the last ivy leaf on the wall. didn't you wonder why it never fluttered or moved when the wind blew? ah, darling, it's behrman's masterpiece - he painted it there the night that the last leaf fell."there had to be a king and queen, of course.  the king was a terrible old man who wore six-shooters and spurs, and shouted in such a tremendous voice that the rattlers on the prairie would run into their holes under the prickly pear.  before there was a royal family they called the man "whispering ben."  when he came to own 50,000 acres of land and more cattle than he could count, they called him o'donnell "the cattle king."the queen had been a mexican girl from laredo.  she made a good, mild, coloradoclaro wife, and even succeeded in teaching ben to modify his voice sufficiently while in the house to keep the dishes from being broken.  when ben got to be king she would sit on the gallery of espinosa ranch and weave rush mats.  when wealth became so irresistible and oppressive that upholstered chairs and a centre table were brought down from san antone in the wagons, she bowed her smooth, dark head, and shared the fate of the danaë.to avoid lèse-majesté you have been presented first to the king and queen.  they do not enter the story, which might be called "the chronicle of the princess, the happy thought, and the lion that bungled his job."josefa o'donnell was the surviving daughter, the princess.  from her mother she inherited warmth of nature and a dusky, semi-tropic beauty.  from ben o'donnell the royal she acquired a store in intrepidity, common sense, and the faculty of ruling.  the combination was was worth going miles to see.  josefa while riding her pony at a gallop could put five out of six bullets through a tomato-can swinging at the end of a string.  she could play for hours with a white kitten she owned, dressing it in all manner of absurd clothes.  scorning a pencil, she could tell you out of her head what 1545 two-year-olds would bring on the hoof, at $8.50 per head. roughly speaking, the espinosal ranch is forty miles long and thirty broad&#8212but mostly leased land.  josefa, on her pony, had prospected over every mile of it.  every cow-puncher on the range knew her by sight and was a loyal vassal.  ripley givens, foreman of one of the espinosal outfits, saw her one day, and made up his mind to f! orm a royal matrimonial alliance.  presumptuous?  no.  in those days in the nueces country a man was a man.  and, after all, the title of cattle king does not presuppose blood royal.  often it only signifies that its owner wears the crown in token of his magnificent qualities in the art of cattle stealing.one day ripley givens rode over to the double elm ranch to inquire about a bunch of strayed yearlings. he was late in setting out on his return trip, and it was sundown when he struck the white horse crossing of the nueces.  from there to his own camp it was sixteen miles.  to the espinosal ranchhouse it was twelve.  givens was tired.  he decided to pass the night at the crossing.there was a fine water hole in the river-bed.  the banks were thickly covered with great trees, undergrown with brush.  back from the water hole fifty yards was a stretch of curly mesquite grass—supper for his horse and bed for himself.  givens staked his horse, and spread out his saddle blankets to dry.  he sat down with his back against a tree and rolled a cigarette.  from somewhere in the dense timber along the river came a sudden, rageful, shivering wail.  the pony danced at the end of his rope and blew a whistling snort of comprehending fear.  givens puffed at his cigarette, but he reached leisurely for his pistol-belt, which lay on the grass, and twirled the cylinder of his weapon tentatively.  a great gar plunged with a loud splash into the water hole.  a little brown rabbit skipped around a bunch of catclaw and sat twitching his whiskers and looking humorously at givens.  the pony went on eating grass.it is well to be reasonably watchful when a mexican lion sings soprano along the arroyos at sundown.  the burden of his song may be that young calves and fat lambs are scarce, and that he has a carnivorous desire for your acquaintance.in the grass lay an empty fruit can, cast there by some former sojourner.  givens caught sight of it with a grunt of satisfaction.  in his coat pocket tied behind his saddle was a handful or two of ground coffee.  black coffee and cigarettes!  what ranchero could desire more?in two minutes he had a little fire going clearly.  he started, with his can, for the water hole.  when within fifteen yards of its edge he saw, between the bushes, a side-saddled pony with down-dropped reins cropping grass a little distance to his left.  just rising from her hands and knees on the brink of the water hole was josefa o'donnell.  she had been drinking water, and she brushed the sand from the palms of her hands.  ten yards away, to her right, half concealed by a clump of sacuista, givens saw the crouching form of the mexican lion.  his amber eyelids glared hungrily; six feet from them was the tip of the tail stretched straight, like a pointer's.  his hind-quarters rocked with the motion of the cat tribe preliminary to leaping.givens did what he could.  his six-shooter was thirty-five yards away lying on the grass.  he gave a loud yell, and dashed between the lion and the princess.the "rucus," as givens called it afterward, was brief and somewhat confused.  when he arrived on the line of attack he saw a dim streak in the air, and heard a couple of faint cracks.  then a hundred pounds of mexican lion plumped down upon his head and flattened him, with a heavy jar, to the ground.  he remembered calling out: "let up, now—no fair gouging!" and then he crawled from under the lion like a worm, with his mouth full of grass and dirt, and a big lump on the back of his head where it had struck the root of a water-elm.  the lion lay motionless.  givens, feeling aggrieved, and suspicious of fouls, shook his fist at the lion, and shouted:  "i'll rastle you again for twenty—" and then he got back to himself.josefa was standing in her tracks, quietly reloading her silver-mounted .38.  it had not been a difficult shot.  the lion's head made an easier mark than a tomato-can swinging at the end of a string.  there was a provoking, teasing, maddening smile upon her mouth and in her dark eyes.  the would-be-rescuing knight felt the fire of his fiasco burn down to his soul. here had been his chance, the chance that he had dreamed of; and momus, and not cupid, had presided over it.  the satyrs in the wood were, no doubt, holding their sides in hilarious, silent laughter.  there had been something like vaudeville—say signor givens and his funny knockabout act with the stuffed lion."is that you, mr. givens?" said josefa, in her deliberate, saccharine contralto.  "you nearly spoiled my shot when you yelled.  did you hurt your head when you fell?""oh, no," said givens, quietly; "that didn't hurt."  he stooped ignominiously and dragged his best stetson hat from under the beast.  it was crushed and wrinkled to a fine comedy effect.  then he knelt down and softly stroked the fierce, open-jawed head of the dead lion."poor old bill!" he exclaimed, mournfully."what's that?" asked josefa, sharply."of course you didn't know, miss josefa," said givens, with an air of one allowing magnanimity to triumph over grief.  "nobody can blame you.  i tried to save him, but i couldn't let you know in time.""save who?""why, bill.  i've been looking for him all day.  you see, he's been our camp pet for two years.  poor old fellow, he wouldn't have hurt a cottontail rabbit.  it'll break the boys all up when they hear about it.  but you couldn't tell, of course, that bill was just trying to play with you."josefa's black eyes burned steadily upon him.  ripley givens met the test successfully.  he stood rumpling the yellow-brown curls on his head pensively.  in his eyes was regret, not unmingled with a gentle reproach.  his smooth features were set to a pattern of indisputable  sorrow.  josefa wavered."what was your pet doing here?" she asked, making a last stand.  "there's no camp near the white horse crossing.""the old rascal ran away from camp yesterday," answered givens, readily.  "it's a wonder the coyotes didn't scare him to death.  you see, jim webster, our horse wrangler, brought a little terrier pup into camp last week.  the pup made life miserable for bill—he used to chase him around and chew his hind legs for hours at a time.  every night when bedtime came bill would sneak under one of the boys' blankets and sleep to keep the pup from finding him.  i reckon he must have been worried pretty desperate or he wouldn't have run away.  he was always afraid to get out of sight of camp."josefa looked at the body of the fierce animal.  givens gently patted one of the formidable paws that could have killed a yearling calf with one blow.  slowly a red flush widened upon the dark olive face of the girl. was it the signal of shame of the true sportsman who has brought down ignoble quarry?  her eyes grew softer, and the lowered lids drove away all their bright mockery."i'm very sorry," she said, humbly; "but he looked so big, and jumped so high that—""poor old bill was hungry," interrupted givens, in quick defence of the deceased.  "we always made him jump for his supper in camp.  he would lie down and roll over for a piece of meat.  when he saw you he thought he was going to get something to eat from you."suddenly josefa's eyes opened wide."i might have shot you!" she exclaimed.  "you ran right in between.  you risked your life to save your pet!  that was fine, mr. givens.  i like a man who is kind to animals."yes; there was even admiration in her gaze now.  after all, there was a hero rising out of the ruins of the anti-climax.  the look on givens's face would have secured him a high position in the s.p.c.a."i always loved 'em," said he; "horses, dogs, mexican lions, cows, alligators—""i hate alligators," instantly demurred josefa; "crawly, muddy things!""did i say alligators?" said givens.  "i meant antelopes, of course."josefa's conscience drove her to make further amends.  she held out her hand penitently.  there was a bright, unshed drop in each of her eyes."please forgive me, mr. givens, won't you?  i'm only a girl, you know, and i was frightened at first.  i'm very, very sorry i shot bill.  you don't know how ashamed i feel.  i wouldn't have done it for anything."givens took the proffered hand.  he held it for a time while he allowed the generosity of his nature to overcome his grief at the loss of bill.  at last it was clear that he had forgiven her."please don't speak of it any more, miss josefa.  'twas enough to frighten any young lady the way bill looked.  i'll explain it all right to the boys.""are you really sure you don't hate me?" josefa came closer to him impulsively.  her eyes were sweet—oh, sweet and pleading with gracious penitence.  "i would hate any one who would kill my kitten.  and how daring and kind of you to risk being shot when you tried to save him!  how very few men would have done that!"  victory wrested from defeat!  vaudeville turned into drama!  bravo, ripley givens!it was now twilight.  of course miss josefa could not be allowed to ride on to the ranch-house alone.  givens resaddled his pony in spite of that animal's reproachful glances, and rode with her.  side by side they galloped across the smooth grass, the princess and the man who was kind to animals.  the prairie odors of fruitful earth and delicate bloom were thick and sweet around them.  coyotes yelping over there on the hill!  no fear.  and yet—josefa rode closer.  a little hand seemed to grope.  givens found it with his own.  the ponies kept an even gait.  the hands lingered together, and the owner of one explained."i never was frightened before, but just think!  how terrible it would be to meet a really wild lion!  poor bill!  i'm so glad you came with me!"o'donnell was sitting on the ranch gallery"hello, rip!" he shouted—"that you?""he rode in with me," said josefa.  "i lost my way and was late.""much obliged," called the cattle king.  "stop over, rip, and ride to camp in the morning."but givens would not.  he would push on to camp.  there was a bunch of steers to start off on the trail at daybreak.  he said good-night, and trotted away.an hour later, when the lights were out, josefa, in her night-robe, came to her door and called to the king in his own room across the brick-paved hallway:"say, pop, you know that old mexican lion they call the 'gotch-eared devil'—the one that killed gonzales, mr. martin's sheep herder, and about fifty calves on the salada range?  well, i settled his hash this afternoon over at the white horse crossing.  put two balls in his head with my .38 while he was on the jump.  i knew him by the slice gone from his left ear that old gonzales cut off with his machete.  you couldn't have made a better shot yourself, daddy.""bully for you!" thundered whispering ben from the darkness of the royal chamber.it looked like a good thing: but wait till i tell you. we were down south, in alabama--bill driscoll and myself-when this kidnapping idea struck us. it was, as bill afterward expressed it, "during a moment of temporary mental apparition"; but we didn't find that out till later.there was a town down there, as flat as a flannel-cake, and called summit, of course. it contained inhabitants of as undeleterious and self-satisfied a class of peasantry as ever clustered around a maypole.bill and me had a joint capital of about six hundred dollars, and we needed just two thousand dollars more to pull off a fraudulent town-lot scheme in western illinois with. we talked it over on the front steps of the hotel. philoprogenitiveness, says we, is strong in semi-rural communities therefore, and for other reasons, a kidnapping project ought to do better there than in the radius of newspapers that send reporters out in plain clothes to stir up talk about such things. we knew that summit couldn't get after us with anything stronger than constables and, maybe, some lackadaisical bloodhounds and a diatribe or two in the weekly farmers' budget. so, it looked good.we selected for our victim the only child of a prominent citizen named ebenezer dorset. the father was respectable and tight, a mortgage fancier and a stern, upright collection-plate passer and forecloser. the kid was a boy of ten, with bas-relief freckles, and hair the colour of the cover of the magazine you buy at the news-stand when you want to catch a train. bill and me figured that ebenezer would melt down for a ransom of two thousand dollars to a cent. but wait till i tell you.about two miles from summit was a little mountain, covered with a dense cedar brake. on the rear elevation of this mountain was a cave. there we stored provisions.one evening after sundown, we drove in a buggy past old dorset's house. the kid was in the street, throwing rocks at a kitten on the opposite fence."hey, little boy!" says bill, "would you like to have a bag of candy and a nice ride?"the boy catches bill neatly in the eye with a piece of brick."that will cost the old man an extra five hundred dollars," says bill, climbing over the wheel.that boy put up a fight like a welter-weight cinnamon bear; but, at last, we got him down in the bottom of the buggy and drove away. we took him up to the cave, and i hitched the horse in the cedar brake. after dark i drove the buggy to the little village, three miles away, where we had hired it, and walked back to the mountain.bill was pasting court-plaster over the scratches and bruises on his features. there was a fire burning behind the big rock at the entrance of the cave, and the boy was watching a pot of boiling coffee, with two buzzard tailfeathers stuck in his red hair. he points a stick at me when i come up, and says:"ha! cursed paleface, do you dare to enter the camp of red chief, the terror of the plains?""he's all right now," says bill, rolling up his trousers and examining some bruises on his shins. "we're playing indian. we're making buffalo bill's show look like magic-lantern views of palestine in the town hall. i'm old hank, the trapper, red chief's captive, and i'm to be scalped at daybreak. by geronimo! that kid can kick hard."yes, sir, that boy seemed to be having the time of his life. the fun of camping out in a cave had made him forget that he was a captive himself. he immediately christened me snake-eye, the spy, and announced that, when his braves returned from the warpath, i was to be broiled at the stake at the rising of the sun.then we had supper; and he filled his mouth full of bacon and bread and gravy, and began to talk. he made a during-dinner speech something like this:"i like this fine. i never camped out before; but i had a pet 'possum once, and i was nine last birthday. i hate to go to school. rats ate up sixteen of jimmy talbot's aunt's speckled hen's eggs. are there any real indians in these woods? i want some more gravy. does the trees moving make the wind blow? we had five puppies. what makes your nose so red, hank? my father has lots of money. are the stars hot? i whipped ed walker twice, saturday. i don't like girls. you dassent catch toads unless with a string. do oxen make any noise? why are oranges round? have you got beds to sleep on in this cave? amos murray has got six toes. a parrot can talk, but a monkey or a fish can't. how many does it take to make twelve?"every few minutes he would remember that he was a pesky redskin, and pick up his stick rifle and tiptoe to the mouth of the cave to rubber for the scouts of the hated paleface. now and then he would let out a warwhoop that made old hank the trapper, shiver. that boy had bill terrorized from the start."red chief," says i to the kid, "would you like to go home?""aw, what for?" says he. "i don't have any fun at home. i hate to go to school. i like to camp out. you won't take me back home again, snake-eye, will you?""not right away," says i. "we'll stay here in the cave a while.""all right!" says he. "that'll be fine. i never had such fun in all my life."we went to bed about eleven o'clock. we spread down some wide blankets and quilts and put red chief between us. we weren't afraid he'd run away. he kept us awake for three hours, jumping up and reaching for his rifle and screeching: "hist! pard," in mine and bill's ears, as the fancied crackle of a twig or the rustle of a leaf revealed to his young imagination the stealthy approach of the outlaw band. at last, i fell into a troubled sleep, and dreamed that i had been kidnapped and chained to a tree by a ferocious pirate with red hair.just at daybreak, i was awakened by a series of awful screams from bill. they weren't yells, or howls, or shouts, or whoops, or yawps, such as you'd expect from a manly set of vocal organs--they were simply indecent, terrifying, humiliating screams, such as women emit when they see ghosts or caterpillars. it's an awful thing to hear a strong, desperate, fat man scream incontinently in a cave at daybreak.i jumped up to see what the matter was. red chief was sitting on bill's chest, with one hand twined in bill's hair. in the other he had the sharp case-knife we used for slicing bacon; and he was industriously and realistically trying to take bill's scalp, according to the sentence that had been pronounced upon him the evening before.i got the knife away from the kid and made him lie down again. but, from that moment, bill's spirit was broken. he laid down on his side of the bed, but he never closed an eye again in sleep as long as that boy was with us. i dozed off for a while, but along toward sun-up i remembered that red chief had said i was to be burned at the stake at the rising of the sun. i wasn't nervous or afraid; but i sat up and lit my pipe and leaned against a rock."what you getting up so soon for, sam?" asked bill."me?" says i. "oh, i got a kind of a pain in my shoulder. i thought sitting up would rest it.""you're a liar!" says bill. "you're afraid. you was to be burned at sunrise, and you was afraid he'd do it. and he would, too, if he could find a match. ain't it awful, sam? do you think anybody will pay out money to get a little imp like that back home?""sure," said i. "a rowdy kid like that is just the kind that parents dote on. now, you and the chief get up and cook breakfast, while i go up on the top of this mountain and reconnoitre."i went up on the peak of the little mountain and ran my eye over the contiguous vicinity. over toward summit i expected to see the sturdy yeomanry of the village armed with scythes and pitchforks beating the countryside for the dastardly kidnappers. but what i saw was a peaceful landscape dotted with one man ploughing with a dun mule. nobody was dragging the creek; no couriers dashed hither and yon, bringing tidings of no news to the distracted parents. there was a sylvan attitude of somnolent sleepiness pervading that section of the external outward surface of alabama that lay exposed to my view. "perhaps," says i to myself, "it has not yet been discovered that the wolves have borne away the tender lambkin from the fold. heaven help the wolves!" says i, and i went down the mountain to breakfast.when i got to the cave i found bill backed up against the side of it, breathing hard, and the boy threatening to smash him with a rock half as big as a cocoanut."he put a red-hot boiled potato down my back," explained bill, "and then mashed it with his foot; and i boxed his ears. have you got a gun about you, sam?"i took the rock away from the boy and kind of patched up the argument. "i'll fix you," says the kid to bill. "no man ever yet struck the red chief but what he got paid for it. you better beware!"after breakfast the kid takes a piece of leather with strings wrapped around it out of his pocket and goes outside the cave unwinding it."what's he up to now?" says bill, anxiously. "you don't think he'll run away, do you, sam?""no fear of it," says i. "he don't seem to be much of a home body. but we've got to fix up some plan about the ransom. there don't seem to be much excitement around summit on account of his disappearance; but maybe they haven't realized yet that he's gone. his folks may think he's spending the night with aunt jane or one of the neighbours. anyhow, he'll be missed to-day. to-night we must get a message to his father demanding the two thousand dollars for his return."just then we heard a kind of war-whoop, such as david might have emitted when he knocked out the champion goliath. it was a sling that red chief had pulled out of his pocket, and he was whirling it around his head.i dodged, and heard a heavy thud and a kind of a sigh from bill, like a horse gives out when you take his saddle off. a niggerhead rock the size of an egg had caught bill just behind his left ear. he loosened himself all over and fell in the fire across the frying pan of hot water for washing the dishes. i dragged him out and poured cold water on his head for half an hour.by and by, bill sits up and feels behind his ear and says: "sam, do you know who my favourite biblical character is?""take it easy," says i. "you'll come to your senses presently.""king herod," says he. "you won't go away and leave me here alone, will you, sam?"i went out and caught that boy and shook him until his freckles rattled."if you don't behave," says i, "i'll take you straight home. now, are you going to be good, or not?""i was only funning," says he sullenly. "i didn't mean to hurt old hank. but what did he hit me for? i'll behave, snake-eye, if you won't send me home, and if you'll let me play the black scout to-day.""i don't know the game," says i. "that's for you and mr. bill to decide. he's your playmate for the day. i'm going away for a while, on business. now, you come in and make friends with him and say you are sorry for hurting him, or home you go, at once."i made him and bill shake hands, and then i took bill aside and told him i was going to poplar cove, a little village three miles from the cave, and find out what i could about how the kidnapping had been regarded in summit. also, i thought it best to send a peremptory letter to old man dorset that day, demanding the ransom and dictating how it should be paid."you know, sam," says bill, "i've stood by you without batting an eye in earthquakes, fire and flood--in poker games, dynamite outrages, police raids, train robberies and cyclones. i never lost my nerve yet till we kidnapped that two-legged skyrocket of a kid. he's got me going. you won't leave me long with him, will you, sam?""i'll be back some time this afternoon," says i. "you must keep the boy amused and quiet till i return. and now we'll write the letter to old dorset."bill and i got paper and pencil and worked on the letter while red chief, with a blanket wrapped around him, strutted up and down, guarding the mouth of the cave. bill begged me tearfully to make the ransom fifteen hundred dollars instead of two thousand. "i ain't attempting," says he, "to decry the celebrated moral aspect of parental affection, but we're dealing with humans, and it ain't human for anybody to give up two thousand dollars for that forty-pound chunk of freckled wildcat. i'm willing to take a chance at fifteen hundred dollars. you can charge the difference up to me."so, to relieve bill, i acceded, and we collaborated a letter that ran this way:ebenezer dorset, esq.:we have your boy concealed in a place far from summit. it is useless for you or the most skilful detectives to attempt to find him. absolutely, the only terms on which you can have him restored to you are these: we demand fifteen hundred dollars in large bills for his return; the money to be left at midnight to-night at the same spot and in the same box as your reply--as hereinafter described. if you agree to these terms, send your answer in writing by a solitary messenger to-night at half-past eight o'clock. after crossing owl creek, on the road to poplar cove, there are three large trees about a hundred yards apart, close to the fence of the wheat field on the right-hand side. at the bottom of the fence-post, opposite the third tree, will be found a small pasteboard box.the messenger will place the answer in this box and return immediately to summit.if you attempt any treachery or fail to comply with our demand as stated, you will never see your boy again.if you pay the money as demanded, he will be returned to you safe and well within three hours. these terms are final, and if you do not accede to them no further communication will be attempted.two desperate men.i addressed this letter to dorset, and put it in my pocket. as i was about to start, the kid comes up to me and says:"aw, snake-eye, you said i could play the black scout while you was gone.""play it, of course," says i. "mr. bill will play with you. what kind of a game is it?""i'm the black scout," says red chief, "and i have to ride to the stockade to warn the settlers that the indians are coming. i 'm tired of playing indian myself. i want to be the black scout.""all right," says i. "it sounds harmless to me. i guess mr. bill will help you foil the pesky savages.""what am i to do?" asks bill, looking at the kid suspiciously."you are the hoss," says black scout. "get down on your hands and knees. how can i ride to the stockade without a hoss?""you'd better keep him interested," said i, "till we get the scheme going. loosen up."bill gets down on his all fours, and a look comes in his eye like a rabbit's when you catch it in a trap." how far is it to the stockade, kid? " he asks, in a husky manner of voice."ninety miles," says the black scout. "and you have to hump yourself to get there on time. whoa, now!"the black scout jumps on bill's back and digs his heels in his side."for heaven's sake," says bill, "hurry back, sam, as soon as you can. i wish we hadn't made the ransom more than a thousand. say, you quit kicking me or i '11 get up and warm you good."i walked over to poplar cove and sat around the postoffice and store, talking with the chawbacons that came in to trade. one whiskerand says that he hears summit is all upset on account of elder ebenezer dorset's boy having been lost or stolen. that was all i wanted to know. i bought some smoking tobacco, referred casually to the price of black-eyed peas, posted my letter surreptitiously and came away. the postmaster said the mail-carrier would come by in an hour to take the mail on to summit.when i got back to the cave bill and the boy were not to be found. i explored the vicinity of the cave, and risked a yodel or two, but there was no response.so i lighted my pipe and sat down on a mossy bank to await developments.in about half an hour i heard the bushes rustle, and bill wabbled out into the little glade in front of the cave. behind him was the kid, stepping softly like a scout, with a broad grin on his face. bill stopped, took off his hat and wiped his face with a red handkerchief. the kid stopped about eight feet behind him."sam," says bill, "i suppose you'll think i'm a renegade, but i couldn't help it. i'm a grown person with masculine proclivities and habits of self-defence, but there is a time when all systems of egotism and predominance fail. the boy is gone. i have sent him home. all is off. there was martyrs in old times," goes on bill, "that suffered death rather than give up the particular graft they enjoyed. none of 'em ever was subjugated to such supernatural tortures as i have been. i tried to be faithful to our articles of depredation; but there came a limit.""what's the trouble, bill?" i asks him."i was rode," says bill, "the ninety miles to the stockade, not barring an inch. then, when the settlers was rescued, i was given oats. sand ain't a palatable substitute. and then, for an hour i had to try to explain to him why there was nothin' in holes, how a road can run both ways and what makes the grass green. i tell you, sam, a human can only stand so much. i takes him by the neck of his clothes and drags him down the mountain. on the way he kicks my legs black-and-blue from the knees down; and i've got two or three bites on my thumb and hand cauterized."but he's gone"--continues bill--"gone home. i showed him the road to summit and kicked him about eight feet nearer there at one kick. i'm sorry we lose the ransom; but it was either that or bill driscoll to the madhouse."bill is puffing and blowing, but there is a look of ineffable peace and growing content on his rose-pink features."bill," says i, "there isn't any heart disease in your family, is there?""no," says bill, "nothing chronic except malaria and accidents. why?""then you might turn around," says i, "and have a look behind you."bill turns and sees the boy, and loses his complexion and sits down plump on the ground and begins to pluck aimlessly at grass and little sticks. for an hour i was afraid for his mind. and then i told him that my scheme was to put the whole job through immediately and that we would get the ransom and be off with it by midnight if old dorset fell in with our proposition. so bill braced up enough to give the kid a weak sort of a smile and a promise to play the russian in a japanese war with him as soon as he felt a little better.i had a scheme for collecting that ransom without danger of being caught by counterplots that ought to commend itself to professional kidnappers. the tree under which the answer was to be left--and the money later on--was close to the road fence with big, bare fields on all sides. if a gang of constables should be watching for any one to come for the note they could see him a long way off crossing the fields or in the road. but no, sirree! at half-past eight i was up in that tree as well hidden as a tree toad, waiting for the messenger to arrive.exactly on time, a half-grown boy rides up the road on a bicycle, locates the pasteboard box at the foot of the fencepost, slips a folded piece of paper into it and pedals away again back toward summit.i waited an hour and then concluded the thing was square. i slid down the tree, got the note, slipped along the fence till i struck the woods, and was back at the cave in another half an hour. i opened the note, got near the lantern and read it to bill. it was written with a pen in a crabbed hand, and the sum and substance of it was this:two desperate men.gentlemen: i received your letter to-day by post, in regard to the ransom you ask for the return of my son. i think you are a little high in your demands, and i hereby make you a counter-proposition, which i am inclined to believe you will accept. you bring johnny home and pay me two hundred and fifty dollars in cash, and i agree to take him off your hands. you had better come at night, for the neighbours believe he is lost, and i couldn't be responsible for what they would do to anybody they saw bringing him back.very respectfully,   ebenezer dorset."great pirates of penzance!" says i; "of all the impudent--"but i glanced at bill, and hesitated. he had the most appealing look in his eyes i ever saw on the face of a dumb or a talking brute."sam," says he, "what's two hundred and fifty dollars, after all? we've got the money. one more night of this kid will send me to a bed in bedlam. besides being a thorough gentleman, i think mr. dorset is a spendthrift for making us such a liberal offer. you ain't going to let the chance go, are you?""tell you the truth, bill," says i, "this little he ewe lamb has somewhat got on my nerves too. we'll take him home, pay the ransom and make our get-away."we took him home that night. we got him to go by telling him that his father had bought a silver-mounted rifle and a pair of moccasins for him, and we were going to hunt bears the next day.it was just twelve o'clock when we knocked at ebenezer's front door. just at the moment when i should have been abstracting the fifteen hundred dollars from the box under the tree, according to the original proposition, bill was counting out two hundred and fifty dollars into dorset's hand.when the kid found out we were going to leave him at home he started up a howl like a calliope and fastened himself as tight as a leech to bill's leg. his father peeled him away gradually, like a porous plaster."how long can you hold him?" asks bill."i'm not as strong as i used to be," says old dorset, "but i think i can promise you ten minutes.""enough," says bill. "in ten minutes i shall cross the central, southern and middle western states, and be legging it trippingly for the canadian border."and, as dark as it was, and as fat as bill was, and as good a runner as i am, he was a good mile and a half out of summit before i could catch up with him.justice-of-the-peace benaja widdup sat in the door of his office smoking his elder-stem pipe. halfway to the zenith the cumberland range rose blue-gray in the afternoon haze. a speckled hen swaggered down the main street of the "settlement," cackling foolishly.up the road came a sound of creaking axles, and then a slow cloud of dust, and then a bull-cart bearing ransie bilbro and his wife. the cart stopped at the justice's door, and the two climbed down. ransie was a narrow six feet of sallow brown skin and yellow hair. the imperturbability of the mountains hung upon him like a suit of armour. the woman was calicoed, angled, snuff-brushed, and weary with unknown desires. through it all gleamed a faint protest of cheated youth unconscious of its loss.the justice of the peace slipped his feet into his shoes, for the sake of dignity, and moved to let them enter."we-all," said the woman, in a voice like the wind blowing through pine boughs, "wants a divo'ce." she looked at ransie to see if he noted any flaw or ambiguity or evasion or partiality or self-partisanship in her statement of their business."a divo'ce," repeated ransie, with a solemn dod. "we-all can't git along together nohow. it's lonesome enough fur to live in the mount'ins when a man and a woman keers fur one another. but when she's a-spittin' like a wildcat or a-sullenin' like a hoot-owl in the cabin, a man ain't got no call to live with her.""when he's a no-'count varmint," said the woman, "without any especial warmth, a-traipsin' along of scalawags and moonshiners and a-layin' on his back pizen 'ith co'n whiskey, and a-pesterin' folks with a pack o' hungry, triflin' houn's to feed!""when she keeps a-throwin' skillet lids," came ransie's antiphony, "and slings b'ilin' water on the best coon-dog in the cumberlands, and sets herself agin' cookin' a man's victuals, and keeps him awake o' nights accusin' him of a sight of doin's!""when he's al'ays a-fightin' the revenues, and gits a hard name in the mount'ins fur a mean man, who's gwine to be able fur to sleep o' nights?"the justice of the peace stirred deliberately to his duties. he placed his one chair and a wooden stool for his petitioners. he opened his book of statutes on the table and scanned the index. presently he wiped his spectacles and shifted his inkstand."the law and the statutes," said he, "air silent on the subjeck of divo'ce as fur as the jurisdiction of this co't air concerned. but, accordin' to equity and the constitution and the golden rule, it's a bad barg'in that can't run both ways. if a justice of the peace can marry a couple, it's plain that he is bound to be able to divo'ce 'em. this here office will issue a decree of divo'ce and abide by the decision of the supreme co't to hold it good."ransie bilbro drew a small tobacco-bag from his trousers pocket. out of this he shook upon the table a five-dollar note. "sold a b'arskin and two foxes fur that," he remarked. "it's all the money we got.""the regular price of a divo'ce in this co't," said the justice, "air five dollars." he stuffed the bill into the pocket of his homespun vest with a deceptive air of indifference. with much bodily toil and mental travail he wrote the decree upon half a sheet of foolscap, and then copied it upon the other. ransie bilbro and his wife listened to his reading of the document that was to give them freedom:"know all men by these presents that ransie bilbro and his wife, ariela bilbro, this day personally appeared before me and promises that hereinafter they will neither love, honour, nor obey each other, neither for better nor worse, being of sound mind and body, and accept summons for divorce according to the peace and dignity of the state. herein fail not, so help you god. benaja widdup, justice of the peace in and for the county of piedmont, state of tennessee."the justice was about to hand one of the documents to ransie. the voice of ariela delayed the transfer. both men looked at her. their dull masculinity was confronted by something sudden and unexpected in the woman."judge, don't you give him that air paper yit. 'tain't all settled, nohow. i got to have my rights first. i got to have my ali-money. 'tain't no kind of a way to do fur a man to divo'ce his wife 'thout her havin' a cent fur to do with. i'm a-layin' off to be a-goin' up to brother ed's up on hogback mount'in. i'm bound fur to hev a pa'r of shoes and some snuff and things besides. ef rance kin affo'd a divo'ce, let him pay me ali-money."ransie bilbro was stricken to dumb perplexity. there had been no previous hint of alimony. women were always bringing up startling and unlooked-for issues.justice benaja widdup felt that the point demanded judicial decision. the authorities were also silent on the subject of alimony. but the woman's feet were bare. the trail to hogback mountain was steep and flinty."ariela bilbro," he asked, in official tones, "how much did you 'low would be good and sufficient ali-money in the case befo' the co't.""i 'lowed," she answered, "fur the shoes and all, to say five dollars. that ain't much fur ali-money, but i reckon that'll git me to up brother ed's.""the amount," said the justice, "air not onreasonable. ransie bilbro, you air ordered by the co't to pay the plaintiff the sum of five dollars befo' the decree of divo'ce air issued.""i hain't no mo' money," breathed ransie, heavily. "i done paid you all i had.""otherwise," said the justice, looking severely over his spectacles, "you air in contempt of co't.""i reckon if you gimme till to-morrow," pleaded the husband, "i mout be able to rake or scrape it up somewhars. i never looked for to be a-payin' no alimoney.""the case air adjourned," said benaja widdup, "till to-morrow, when you-all will present yo'selves and obey the order of the co't. followin' of which the decrees of divo'ce will be delivered." he sat down in the door and began to loosen a shoestring."we mout as well go down to uncle ziah's," decided ransie, "and spend the night." he climbed into the cart on one side, and ariela climbed in on the other. obeying the flap of his rope, the little red bull slowly came around on a tack, and the cart crawled away in the nimbus arising from its wheels.justice-of-the-peace benaja widdup smoked his elderstem pipe. late in the afternoon he got his weekly paper, and read it until the twilight dimmed its lines. then he lit the tallow candle on his table, and read until the moon rose, marking the time for supper. he lived in the double log cabin on the slope near the girdled poplar. going home to supper he crossed a little branch darkened by a laurel thicket. the dark figure of a man stepped from the laurels and pointed a rifle at his breast. his hat was pulled down low, and something covered most of his face."i want yo' money," said the figure, "'thout any talk. i'm gettin' nervous, and my finger's a-wabblin' on this here trigger.""i've only got f-f-five dollars," said the justice, producing it from his vest pocket."roll it up," came the order, "and stick it in the end of this here gun-bar'l."the bill was crisp and new. even fingers that were clumsy and trembling found little difficulty in making a spill of it and inserting it (this with less ease) into the muzzle of the rifle."now i reckon you kin be goin' along," said the robber.the justice lingered not on his way.the next day came the little red bull, drawing the cart to the office door. justice benaja widdup had his shoes on, for he was expecting the visit. in his presence ransie bilbro handed to his wife a five-dollar bill. the official's eye sharply viewed it. it seemed to curl up as though it had been rolled and inserted into the end of a gun-barrel. but the justice refrained from comment. it is true that other bills might be inclined to curl. he handed each one a decree of divorce. each stood awkwardly silent, slowly folding the guarantee of freedom. the woman cast a shy glance full of constraint at ransie."i reckon you'll be goin' back up to the cabin," she said, along 'ith the bull-cart. there's bread in the tin box settin' on the shelf. i put the bacon in the b'ilin'-pot to keep the hounds from gittin' it. don't forget to wind the clock to-night.""you air a-goin' to your brother ed's?" asked ransie, with fine unconcern."i was 'lowin' to get along up thar afore night. i ain't sayin' as they'll pester theyselves any to make me welcome, but i hain't nowhar else fur to go. it's a right smart ways, and i reckon i better be goin'. i'll be a-sayin' good-bye, ranse - that is, if you keer fur to say so.""i don't know as anybody's a hound dog," said ransie, in a martyr's voice, "fur to not want to say good-bye -- 'less you air so anxious to git away that you don't want me to say it."ariela was silent. she folded the five-dollar bill and her decree carefully, and placed them in the bosom of her dress. benaja widdup watched the money disappear with mournful eyes behind his spectacles.and then with his next words he achieved rank (as his thoughts ran) with either the great crowd of the world's sympathizers or the little crowd of its great financiers."be kind o' lonesome in the old cabin to-night, ranse," he said.ransie bilbro stared out at the cumberlands, clear blue now in the sunlight. he did not look at ariela."i 'low it might be lonesome," he said; "but when folks gits mad and wants a divo'ce, you can't make folks stay.""there's others wanted a divo'ce," said ariela, speaking to the wooden stool. "besides, nobody don't want nobody to stay.""nobody never said they didn't.""nobody never said they did. i reckon i better start on now to brother ed's.""nobody can't wind that old clock.""want me to go back along 'ith you in the cart and wind it fur you, ranse?"the mountaineer's countenance was proof against emotion. but he reached out a big hand and enclosed ariela's thin brown one. her soul peeped out once through her impassive face, hallowing it."them hounds shan't pester you no more," said ransie. "i reckon i been mean and low down. you wind that clock, ariela.""my heart hit's in that cabin, ranse," she whispered, "along 'ith you. i ai'nt a-goin' to git mad no more. le's be startin', ranse, so's we kin git home by sundown." justice-of-the-peace benaja widdup interposed as they started for the door, forgetting his presence."in the name of the state of tennessee," he said, "i forbid you-all to be a-defyin' of its laws and statutes. this co't is mo' than willin' and full of joy to see the clouds of discord and misunderstandin' rollin' away from two lovin' hearts, but it air the duty of the co't to p'eserve the morals and integrity of the state. the co't reminds you that you air no longer man and wife, but air divo'ced by regular decree, and as such air not entitled to the benefits and 'purtenances of the mattermonal estate."ariela caught ransie's arm. did those words mean that she must lose him now when they had just learned the lesson of life?"but the co't air prepared," went on the justice, "fur to remove the disabilities set up by the decree of divo'ce. the co't air on hand to perform the solemn ceremony of marri'ge, thus fixin' things up and enablin' the parties in the case to resume the honour'ble and elevatin' state of mattermony which they desires. the fee fur performin' said ceremony will be, in this case, to wit, five dollars."aricla caught the gleam of promise in his words. swiftly her hand went to her bosom. freely as an alighting dove the bill fluttered to the justice's table. her sallow cheek coloured as she stood hand in hand with ransie and listened to the reuniting words.ransie helped her into the cart, and climbed in beside her. the little red bull turned once more, and they set out, hand-clasped, for the mountains.justice-of-the-peace benaja widdup sat in his door and took off his shoes. once again he fingered the bill tucked down in his vest pocket. once again he smoked his elder-stem pipe. once again the speck-led hen swaggered down the main street of the "settlement," cackling foolishly.the boy sitting opposite him was his enemy.the boy sitting opposite him was called tigo, and he wore a green silk jacket with an orange stripe on each sleeve.  the jacket told danny that tigo was his enemy.  the jacket shrieked, "enemy, enemy!""this is a good piece," tigo said, indicating the gun on the table."  this runs you close to forty-five bucks, you try to buy it in a store.  that's a lot of money."the gun on the table was a smith & wesson .38 police special.it rested exactly in the center of the table, its sawed-off, two-inch barrel abruptly terminating the otherwise lethal grace of the weapon.  there was a checked walnut stock on the gun, and the gun was finished in a flat blue.  alongside the gun were three .38 special cartridges.danny looked at the gun disinterestedly.  he was nervous and apprehensive, but he kept tight control of his face.  he could not show tigo what he was feeling.  tigo was the enemy, and so he presented a mask to the enemy, cocking one eyebrow and saying, "i seen pieces before.  there's nothing special about this one."  "except what we  got to do with it,"  tigo said.  tigo was studying him with large brown eyes.  the eyes were moist-looking.  he was not a bad-looking kid, tigo, with thick black hair and maybe  nose that was too long, but his mouth and chin were good.  you could usually tell a cat by his mouth and his chin.  tigo would not turkey out of this particular rumble.  of that, danny was sure.  "why don't we start?"  danny asked.  he wet his lips and looked across at tigo."you understand," tigo said, "i got no bad blood for you."  "i understand.""this is what the club said.  this is how the club said we should settle it.  without a big street diddlebop, you dig?  but i want you to know i don't know you from a hole in the wall-except you wear a blue and gold jacket.""and you wear a green and orange one," danny said," and that's enough for me.""sure, but what i was trying to say...""we going to sit and talk all night, or we going to get this thing rolling?"  danny asked."what i'm tryin to say," tigo went on, "is that i just happened to be picked for this, you know?  like to settle this thing that's between the two clubs i mean, you got to admit your boys shouldn't have come in our territory last night.""i got to admit nothing," danny said flatly."well, anyway, they shot at the candy store.  that wasn't right.  there's supposed to be a truce on.""okay, okay,"  danny said."so like... like this is the way we agreed to settle it.  i mean, one of us and... and one of you.  fair and square.  without any street boppin', and without any law trouble.""let's get on with it," danny said."i'm trying to say, i never even seen you on the street before this.  so this ain't nothin' personal with me.  whichever way it turns out, like...""i never seen you neither," danny said.tigo stared at him for a long time.  "that's cause you're new around here.  where you from originally?""my people come down from the bronx.""you got a big family?""a sister and two brothers, that's all.""yeah, i only got a sister."  tigo shrugged.  "well."  he sighed.  "so."  he sighed again.  "let's make it, huh?""i'm waitin',"  danny said.tigo picked up the gun, and then he took one of the cartridges from the table top.  he broke open the gun, slid the cartridge into the cylinder, and then snapped the gun shut and twirled the cylinder.  "round and round she goes," he said, "and where she stops, nobody knows.  there's six chambers in the cylinder and only one cartridge.  that makes the odds five-to-one that the cartridge'll be in firing position when the cylinder stops whirling.  you dig?""i dig.""i'll go first," tigo said.danny looked at him suspiciously.  "why?""you want to go first?""i don't know.""i'm giving you a break."  tigo grinned.  "i may blow my head off first time out.""why you giving me a break?"  danny asked.tigo shrugged.  "what the hell's the difference?"  he gave the cylinder a fast twirl."the russians invented this, huh?"  danny asked."yeah.""i always said they was crazy bastards.""yeah, i always..." tigo stopped talking.  the cylinder was stopped now.  he took a deep breath, put the barrel of the .38 to his temple, and then squeezed the trigger.the firing pin clicked on an empty chamber."well, that was easy, wasn't it?"  he asked.  he shoved the gun across the table.  "your turn, danny."danny reached for the gun.  it was cold in the basement room, but he was sweating now.  he pulled the gun toward him, then left it on the table while he dried his palms on his trousers.  he picked up the gun then and stared at it."it's a nifty piece," tigo said.  "i like a good piece.""yeah, i do too," danny said.  "you can tell a good piece just by the way it feels in your hand."tigo looked surprised.  "i mentioned that to one of the guys yesterday, and he thought i was nuts."lots of guys don't know about pieces," danny said, shrugging.  "i was thinking," tigo, said, "when i get old enough, i'll join the army, you know?  i'd like to work around pieces.""i thought of that, too.  i'd join now only my old lady won't give me permission.  she's got to sign if i join now.""yeah, they're all the same," tigo said smiling.  "your old lady born here or the old country?""the old country," danny said."yeah, well you know they got these old-fashioned ideas.""i better spin," danny said."yeah," tigo agreed.danny slapped the cylinder with his left hand.  the cylinder whirled, whirled, and then stopped.  slowly, danny put the gun to his head.  he wanted to close his eyes, but he didn't dare.  tigo, the enemy, was watching him.  he returned tigo's stare, and then he squeezed the trigger.his heart skipped a beat, and then over the roar of his blood he heard the empty click.  hastily, he put the gun down on the table."makes you sweat, don't it?"  tigo said.danny nodded, saying nothing.  he watched tigo.  tigo was looking at the gun."me now, huh?"  tigo said.  he took a deep breath, then picked up the .38.  he twirled the cylinder, waited for it to stop, and then put the gun to his head."bang!"  tigo said, and then he squeezed the trigger.  again the firing pin clicked on an empty chamber.  tigo let out his breath and put the gun down."i thought i was dead that time," he said."i could hear the harps," danny said."this is a good way to lose weight, you know that?"  tigo laughed nervously, and then his laugh became honest when he saw danny was laughing with him.  "ain't it the truth?"  you could lose ten pounds this way.""my old lady's like a house," danny said laughing.  "she ought to try this kind of a diet."  he laughed at his own humor, pleased when tigo joined him."that's the trouble," tigo said.  "you see a nice deb in the street, you think it's crazy, you know?  then they get to be our people's age, and they turn to fat."  he shook his head."you got a chick?"  danny asked."yeah, i got one.""what's her name?""aw, you don't know her.""maybe i do,"  danny said."her name is juana."  tigo watched him.  "she's about five-two, got these brown eyes...""i think i know her,"  danny said.  he nodded.  "yeah, i think i know her.""she's nice, ain't she?"  tigo asked.  he leaned forward, as if danny's answer was of great importance to him."yeah she's nice," danny said."yeah.  hey maybe sometime we could..."  tigo cut himself short.  he looked down at the gun, and his sudden enthusiasm seemed to ebb completely.  "it's you turn," he said."here goes nothing," danny said.  he twirled the cylinder, sucked in his breath, and then fired.the emptily click was loud in the stillness of the room."man!"  danny said."we're pretty lucky, you know?"  tigo said."so far.""we better lower the odds.  the boys won't like it if we..."  he stopped himself again, and then reached for one of the cartridges on the table.  he broke open the gun again, slipped in the second cartridge into the cylinder.  "now we got two cartridges in here," he said.  "two cartridges, six chambers.  that's four-to-two.  divide it, and you get two-to-two."  he paused.  "you game?""that's... that's what we're here for, ain't it?""sure.""okay then.""gone,"  tigo said, nodding his head.  "you got courage, danny.""you're the one needs the courage,"  danny said gently.  "it's your spin.""tigo lifted the gun.  idly, he began spinning the cylinder."you live on the next block, don't you?"  danny asked."yeah."  tigo kept slapping the cylinder.  it spun with a gently whirring sound."that's how come we never crossed paths, i guess.  also, i'm new on the scene.""yeah, well you know, you get hooked up with one club, that's the way it is.""you like the guys on you club?"  danny asked, wondering why he was asking such a stupid question, listening to the whirring of the cylinder at the same time."they're okay."  tigo shrugged.  "none of them really send me, but that's the club on my block, so what're you gonna do, huh?"  his hand left the cylinder.  it stopped spinning.  he put the gun to his head."wait!"  danny said.tigo looked puzzled.  "what's the matter?""nothing.  i just wanted to say... i mean..."  danny frowned.  "i don't dig too many of the guys on my club, either."tigo nodded.  for a moment, their eyes locked.  then tigo shrugged, and fired.the empty click filled the basement room."phew," tigo said."man, you can say that again."tigo slid the gun across the table.danny hesitated an instant.  he did not want to pick up the gun.  he felt sure that this time the firing pin would strike the percussion cap of one of the cartridges.  he was sure that this time he would shoot himself."sometimes i think i'm turkey," he said to tigo, surprised that his thoughts had found voice."i feel that way sometimes, too,"  tigo said."i never told that to nobody," danny said.  "the guys on my club would laugh at me, i ever told them that.""some things you got to keep to yourself.  there ain't nobody you can trust in this world.""there should be somebody you can trust,"  danny said.  "hell, you can't tell nothing to your people.  they don't understand."  tigo laughed.  "that's an old story.  but that's the way things are.  what're you gonna do?""yeah.  still, sometimes i think i'm turkey.""sure, sure," tigo said.  "it ain't only that, though.  like sometimes... well, don't you wonder what you're doing stomping some guy in the street?  like ... you know what i mean?  like ... who's the guy to you?  what you got to beat him up for?  'cause he messed with somebody else's girl?"  tigo shook his head.  "it gets complicated sometimes.""yeah, but ..." danny frowned again.  "you got to stick with the club.  don't you?""sure, sure ... hell yes."  again, their eyes locked."well, here goes."  danny said.  he lifted the gun.  "it's just ..." he shook his head, and then twirled the cylinder.  the cylinder spun, and then stopped.  he studied the gun, wondering if one of the cartridges would roar from the barrel when he squeezed the trigger.then he fired.click."i didn't think you was going through with it," tigo said."i didn't neither.""you got heart, danny," tigo said.  he looked at the gun.  he picked it up and broke it open."what you doing?"  danny asked."another cartridge,"  tigo said.  "six chambers, three cartridges.  that makes it even money.  you game?""you?" "the boys said... " tigo stopped talking.  "yeah, i'm game," he added, his voice curiously low."it's your turn, you know.""i know," danny watched as tigo picked up the gun."you ever been rowboating on the lake?"tigo looked across the table at danny, his eyes wide. "once," he said.  "i went with juana.""is it ... is it any kicks?""yeah. yeah, its grand kicks.  you mean you never been?""no," danny said."hey, you got to tryin, man," tigo said excitedly.  "you'll like it.  hey, you try it.""yeah, i was thinking maybe this sunday i'd ... " he did not complete the sentence."my spin," tigo said wearily.  he twirled the cylinder.  "here goes a good man," he said, and he put the revolver to his head and squeezed the trigger.click.danny smiled nervously.  "no rest for the weary," he said.  "but jesus you've got the heart.  i don't know if i can go through with it."sure, you can," tigo assured him.  "listen, what's there to be afraid of?"  he slid the gun across the table."we keep this up all night?"  danny asked."they said ... you know ... ""well, it ain't so bad.  i mean, hell, we didn't have this operation, we wouldn'ta got a chance to talk, huh?"  he grinned feebly."yeah," tigo said, his face splitting in a wide grin.  "it ain't been so bad, huh?""no, it's been ... well, you know, these guys on the club, who can talk to them?"he picked up the gun. "we could ..." tigo started."what?""we could say ... well ... like we kept shootin' an' nothing happened, so ..." tigo shrugged.  "what the hell!  we can't do this all night, can we?""i don't know.""let's make this the last spin.  listen, they don't like it, they can take a flying leap, you know?""i don't think they'll like it.  we're supposed to settle this for the clubs.""screw the clubs!"  tigo said.  "can't we pick our own ..."  the word was hard coming.  when it came, his eyes did not leave danny's face.  "... friends?""sure we can," danny said vehemently.  "sure we can!  why not?""the last spin," tigo said.  "come on, the last spin.""gone," danny said.  "hey you know, i'm glad they got this idea.  you know that?  i'm actually glad!"  he twirled the cylinder.  "look, you want to go on the lake this sunday?  i mean with your girl and mine?  we could get two boats.  or even one if you want."  "yeah, one boat,"  tigo said.  "hey, your girl'll like juana, i mean it.  she's a swell chick."the cylinder stopped.  danny put the gun to his head quickly."here's to sunday," he said.  he grinned at tigo, and tigo grinned back, and then danny fired.the explosion rocked the small basement room, ripping away half of danny's head, shattering his face.  a small cry escaped tigo's throat, and a look of incredulous shock knifed his eyes.  then he put his head on the table and began weeping.a posthumous writing of diedrich knickerbockerby woden, god of saxons,  from whence comes wensday, that is wodensday,  truth is a thing that ever i will keep  unto thylke day in which i creep into  my sepulchre. cartwrightthe following tale was found among the papers of the late diedrich knickerbocker, an old gentleman of new york, who was very curious in the dutch history of the province, and the manners of the descendants from its primitive settlers. his historical researches, however, did not lie so much among books as among men; for the former are lamentably scanty on his favorite topics; whereas he found the old burghers, and still more their wives, rich in that legendary lore, so invaluable to true history. whenever, therefore, he happened upon a genuine dutch family, snugly shut up in its low-roofed farmhouse, under a spreading sycamore, he looked upon it as a little clasped volume of black-letter, and studied it with the zeal of a book-worm.the result of all these researches was a history of the province during the reign of the dutch governors, which he published some years since. there have been various opinions as to the literary character of his work, and, to tell the truth, it is not a whit better than it should be. its chief merit is its scrupulous accuracy, which indeed was a little questioned on its first appearance, but has since been completely established; and it is now admitted into all historical collections, as a book of unquestionable authority.the old gentleman died shortly after the publication of his work, and now that he is dead and gone, it cannot do much harm to his memory to say that his time might have been better employed in weightier labors. he, however, was apt to ride his hobby his own way; and though it did now and then kick up the dust a little in the eyes of his neighbors, and grieve the spirit of some friends, for whom he felt the truest deference and affection; yet his errors and follies are remembered "more in sorrow than in anger," and it begins to be suspected, that he never intended to injure or offend. but however his memory may be appreciated by critics, it is still held dear by many folks, whose good opinion is well worth having; particularly by certain biscuit-bakers, who have gone so far as to imprint his likeness on their new-year cakes; and have thus given him a chance for immortality, almost equal to the being stamped on a waterloo medal, or a queen anne's farthing.***whoever has made a voyage up the hudson must remember the kaatskill mountains. they are a dismembered branch of the great appalachian family, and are seen away to the west of the river, swelling up to a noble height, and lording it over the surrounding country. every change of season, every change of weather, indeed, every hour of the day, produces some change in the magical hues and shapes of these mountains, and they are regarded by all the good wives, far and near, as perfect barometers. when the weather is fair and settled, they are clothed in blue and purple, and print their bold outlines on the clear evening sky, but, sometimes, when the rest of the landscape is cloudless, they will gather a hood of gray vapors about their summits, which, in the last rays of the setting sun, will glow and light up like a crown of glory.at the foot of these fairy mountains, the voyager may have descried the light smoke curling up from a village, whose shingle-roofs gleam among the trees, just where the blue tints of the upland melt away into the fresh green of the nearer landscape. it is a little village of great antiquity, having been founded by some of the dutch colonists, in the early times of the province, just about the beginning of the government of the good peter stuyvesant, (may he rest in peace!) and there were some of the houses of the original settlers standing within a few years, built of small yellow bricks brought from holland, having latticed windows and gable fronts, surmounted with weather-cocks.in that same village, and in one of these very houses (which, to tell the precise truth, was sadly time-worn and weather-beaten), there lived many years since, while the country was yet a province of great britain, a simple good-natured fellow of the name of rip van winkle. he was a descendant of the van winkles who figured so gallantly in the chivalrous days of peter stuyvesant, and accompanied him to the siege of fort christina. he inherited, however, but little of the martial character of his ancestors. i have observed that he was a simple good-natured man; he was, moreover, a kind neighbor, and an obedient hen-pecked husband. indeed, to the latter circumstance might be owing that meekness of spirit which gained him such universal popularity; for those men are most apt to be obsequious and conciliating abroad, who are under the discipline of shrews at home. their tempers, doubtless, are rendered pliant and malleable in the fiery furnace of domestic tribulation; and a curtain lecture is worth all the sermons in the world for teaching the virtues of patience and long-suffering. a termagant wife may, therefore, in some respects, be considered a tolerable blessing; and if so, rip van winkle was thrice blessed.certain it is, that he was a great favorite among all the good wives of the village, who, as usual, with the amiable sex, took his part in all family squabbles; and never failed, whenever they talked those matters over in their evening gossipings, to lay all the blame on dame van winkle. the children of the village, too, would shout with joy whenever he approached. he assisted at their sports, made their playthings, taught them to fly kites and shoot marbles, and told them long stories of ghosts, witches, and indians. whenever he went dodging about the village, he was surrounded by a troop of them, hanging on his skirts, clambering on his back, and playing a thousand tricks on him with impunity; and not a dog would bark at him throughout the neighborhood.the great error in rip's composition was an insuperable aversion to all kinds of profitable labor. it could not be from the want of assiduity or perseverance; for he would sit on a wet rock, with a rod as long and heavy as a tartar's lance, and fish all day without a murmur, even though he should not be encouraged by a single nibble. he would carry a fowling-piece on his shoulder for hours together, trudging through woods and swamps, and up hill and down dale, to shoot a few squirrels or wild pigeons. he would never refuse to assist a neighbor even in the roughest toil, and was a foremost man at all country frolics for husking indian corn, or building stone-fences; the women of the village, too, used to employ him to run their errands, and to do such little odd jobs as their less obliging husbands would not do for them. in a word rip was ready to attend to anybody's business but his own; but as to doing family duty, and keeping his farm in order, he found it impossible.in fact, he declared it was of no use to work on his farm; it was the most pestilent little piece of ground in the whole country; every thing about it went wrong, and would go wrong, in spite of him. his fences were continually falling to pieces; his cow would either go astray, or get among the cabbages; weeds were sure to grow quicker in his fields than anywhere else; the rain always made a point of setting in just as he had some out-door work to do; so that though his patrimonial estate had dwindled away under his management, acre by acre, until there was little more left than a mere patch of indian corn and potatoes, yet it was the worst conditioned farm in the neighborhood.his children, too, were as ragged and wild as if they belonged to nobody. his son rip, an urchin begotten in his own likeness, promised to inherit the habits, with the old clothes of his father. he was generally seen trooping like a colt at his mother's heels, equipped in a pair of his father's cast-off galligaskins, which he had much ado to hold up with one hand, as a fine lady does her train in bad weather.rip van winkle, however, was one of those happy mortals, of foolish, well-oiled dispositions, who take the world easy, eat white bread or brown, whichever can be got with least thought or trouble, and would rather starve on a penny than work for a pound. if left to himself, he would have whistled life away in perfect contentment; but his wife kept continually dinning in his ears about his idleness, his carelessness, and the ruin he was bringing on his family. morning, noon, and night, her tongue was incessantly going, and everything he said or did was sure to produce a torrent of household eloquence. rip had but one way of replying to all lectures of the kind, and that, by frequent use, had grown into a habit. he shrugged his shoulders, shook his head, cast up his eyes, but said nothing. this, however, always provoked a fresh volley from his wife; so that he was fain to draw off his forces, and take to the outside of the house - the only side which, in truth, belongs to a hen-pecked husband.rip's sole domestic adherent was his dog wolf, who was as much hen-pecked as his master; for dame van winkle regarded them as companions in idleness, and even looked upon wolf with an evil eye, as the cause of his master's going so often astray. true it is, in all points of spirit befitting an honorable dog, he was as courageous an animal as ever scoured the woods - but what courage can withstand the ever-during and all-besetting terrors of a woman's tongue? the moment wolf entered the house his crest fell, his tail drooped to the ground, or curled between his legs, he sneaked about with a gallows air, casting many a sidelong glance at dame van winkle, and at the least flourish of a broom-stick or ladle, he would fly to the door with yelping precipitation.times grew worse and worse with rip van winkle as years of matrimony rolled on; a tart temper never mellows with age, and a sharp tongue is the only edged tool that grows keener with constant use. for a long while he used to console himself, when driven from home, by frequenting a kind of perpetual club of the sages, philosophers, and other idle personages of the village; which held its sessions on a bench before a small inn, designated by a rubicund portrait of his majesty george the third. here they used to sit in the shade through a long lazy summer's day, talking listlessly over village gossip, or telling endless sleepy stories about nothing. but it would have been worth any statesman's money to have heard the profound discussions that sometimes took place, when by chance an old newspaper fell into their hands from some passing traveller. how solemnly they would listen to the contents, as drawled out by derrick van bummel, the schoolmaster, a dapper learned little man, who was not to be daunted by the most gigantic word in the dictionary; and how sagely they would deliberate upon public events some months after they had taken place.the opinions of this junto were completely controlled by nicholas vedder, a patriarch of the village, and landlord of the inn, at the door of which he took his seat from morning till night, just moving sufficiently to avoid the sun and keep in the shade of a large tree; so that the neighbors could tell the hour by his movements as accurately as by a sundial. it is true he was rarely heard to speak, but smoked his pipe incessantly. his adherents, however (for every great man has his adherents), perfectly understood him, and knew how to gather his opinions. when anything that was read or related displeased him, he was observed to smoke his pipe vehemently, and to send forth short, frequent and angry puffs; but when pleased, he would inhale the smoke slowly and tranquilly, and emit it in light and placid clouds; and sometimes, taking the pipe from his mouth, and letting the fragrant vapor curl about his nose, would gravely nod his head in token of perfect approbation.from even this stronghold the unlucky rip was at length routed by his termagant wife, who would suddenly break in upon the tranquillity of the assemblage and call the members all to naught; nor was that august personage, nicholas vedder himself, sacred from the daring tongue of this terrible virago, who charged him outright with encouraging her husband in habits of idleness.poor rip was at last reduced almost to despair; and his only alternative, to escape from the labor of the farm and clamor of his wife, was to take gun in hand and stroll away into the woods. here he would sometimes seat himself at the foot of a tree, and share the contents of his wallet with wolf, with whom he sympathized as a fellow-sufferer in persecution. "poor wolf," he would say, "thy mistress leads thee a dog's life of it; but never mind, my lad, whilst i live thou shalt never want a friend to stand by thee!" wolf would wag his tail, look wistfuly in his master's face, and if dogs can feel pity i verily believe he reciprocated the sentiment with all his heart.in a long ramble of the kind on a fine autumnal day, rip had unconsciously scrambled to one of the highest parts of the kaatskill mountains. he was after his favorite sport of squirrel shooting, and the still solitudes had echoed and re-echoed with the reports of his gun. panting and fatigued, he threw himself, late in the afternoon, on a green knoll, covered with mountain herbage, that crowned the brow of a precipice. from an opening between the trees he could overlook all the lower country for many a mile of rich woodland. he saw at a distance the lordly hudson, far, far below him, moving on its silent but majestic course, with the reflection of a purple cloud, or the sail of a lagging bark, here and there sleeping on its glassy bosom, and at last losing itself in the blue highlands.on the other side he looked down into a deep mountain glen, wild, lonely, and shagged, the bottom filled with fragments from the impending cliffs, and scarcely lighted by the reflected rays of the setting sun. for some time rip lay musing on this scene; evening was gradually advancing; the mountains began to throw their long blue shadows over the valleys; he saw that it would be dark long before he could reach the village, and he heaved a heavy sigh when he thought of encountering the terrors of dame van winkle.as he was about to descend, he heard a voice from a distance, hallooing, "rip van winkle! rip van winkle!" he looked round, but could see nothing but a crow winging its solitary flight across the mountain. he thought his fancy must have deceived him, and turned again to descend, when he heard the same cry ring through the still evening air: "rip van winkle! rip van winkle!" - at the same time wolf bristled up his back, and giving a low growl, skulked to his master's side, looking fearfully down into the glen. rip now felt a vague apprehension stealing over him; he looked anxiously in the same direction, and perceived a strange figure slowly toiling up the rocks, and bending under the weight of something he carried on his back. he was surprised to see any human being in this lonely and unfrequented place, but supposing it to be some one of the neighborhood in need of his assistance, he hastened down to yield it.on nearer approach he was still more surprised at the singularity of the stranger's appearance. he was a short square-built old fellow, with thick bushy hair, and a grizzled beard. his dress was of the antique dutch fashion - a cloth jerkin strapped round the waist - several pair of breeches, the outer one of ample volume, decorated with rows of buttons down the sides, and bunches at the knees. he bore on his shoulder a stout keg, that seemed full of liquor, and made signs for rip to approach and assist him with the load. though rather shy and distrustful of this new acquaintance, rip complied with his usual alacrity; and mutually relieving one another, they clambered up a narrow gully, apparently the dry bed of a mountain torrent. as they ascended, rip every now and then heard long rolling peals, like distant thunder, that seemed to issue out of a deep ravine, or rather cleft, between lofty rocks, toward which their rugged path conducted. he paused for an instant, but supposing it to be the muttering of one of those transient thunder-showers which often take place in mountain heights, he proceeded. passing through the ravine, they came to a hollow, like a small amphitheatre, surrounded by perpendicular precipices, over the brinks of which impending trees shot their branches, so that you only caught glimpses of the azure sky and the bright evening cloud. during the whole time rip and his companion had labored on in silence; for though the former marvelled greatly what could be the object of carrying a keg of liquor up this wild mountain, yet there was something strange and incomprehensible about the unknown, that inspired awe and checked familiarity.on entering the amphitheatre, new objects of wonder presented themselves. on a level spot in the centre was a company of odd-looking personages playing at nine-pins. they were dressed in a quaint outlandish fashion; some wore short doublets, others jerkins, with long knives in their belts, and most of them had enormous breeches, of similar style with that of the guide's. their visages, too, were peculiar: one had a large beard, broad face, and small piggish eyes: the face of another seemed to consist entirely of nose, and was surmounted by a white sugar-loaf hat set off with a little red cock's tail. they all had beards, of various shapes and colors. there was one who seemed to be the commander. he was a stout old gentleman, with a weather-beaten countenance; he wore a laced doublet, broad belt and hanger, high-crowned hat and feather, red stockings, and high-heeled shoes, with roses in them. the whole group reminded rip of the figures in an old flemish painting, in the parlor of dominie van shaick, the village parson, and which had been brought over from holland at the time of the settlement.what seemed particularly odd to rip was, that though these folks were evidently amusing themselves, yet they maintained the gravest faces, the most mysterious silence, and were, withal, the most melancholy party of pleasure he had ever witnessed. nothing interrupted the stillness of the scene but the noise of the balls, which, whenever they were rolled, echoed along the mountains like rumbling peals of thunder.as rip and his companion approached them, they suddenly desisted from their play, and stared at him with such fixed statue-like gaze, and such strange, uncouth, lack-lustre countenances, that his heart turned within him, and his knees smote together. his companion now emptied the contents of the keg into large flagons, and made signs to him to wait upon the company. he obeyed with fear and trembling; they quaffed the liquor in profound silence, and then returned to their game.by degrees rip's awe and apprehension subsided. he even ventured, when no eye was fixed upon him, to taste the beverage, which he found had much of the flavor of excellent hollands. he was naturally a thirsty soul, and was soon tempted to repeat the draught. one taste provoked another; and he reiterated his visits to the flagon so often that at length his senses were overpowered, his eyes swam in his head, his head gradually declined, and he fell into a deep sleep.on waking, he found himself on the green knoll whence he had first seen the old man of the glen. he rubbed his eyes - it was a bright sunny morning. the birds were hopping and twittering among the bushes, and the eagle was wheeling aloft, and breasting the pure mountain breeze. "surely," thought rip, "i have not slept here all night." he recalled the occurrences before he fell asleep. the strange man with a keg of liquor - the mountain ravine - the wild retreat among the rocks - the woe-begone party at ninepins - the flagon - "oh! that flagon! that wicked flagon!" thought rip - "what excuse shall i make to dame van winkle!"he looked round for his gun, but in place of the clean well-oiled fowling-piece, he found an old firelock lying by him, the barrel incrusted with rust, the lock falling off, and the stock worm-eaten. he now suspected that the grave roysterers of the mountain had put a trick upon him, and having dosed him with liquor, had robbed him of his gun. wolf, too, had disappeared, but he might have strayed away after a squirrel or partridge. he whistled after him and shouted his name, but all in vain; the echoes repeated his whistle and shout, but no dog was to be seen.he determined to revisit the scene of the last evening's gambol, and if he met with any of the party, to demand his dog and gun. as he rose to walk, he found himself stiff in the joints, and wanting in his usual activity. "these mountain beds do not agree with me," thought rip; "and if this frolic should lay me up with a fit of the rheumatism, i shall have a blessed time with dame van winkle." with some difficulty he got down into the glen: he found the gully up which he and his companion had ascended the preceding evening; but to his astonishment a mountain stream was now foaming down it, leaping from rock to rock, and filling the glen with babbling murmurs. he, however, made shift to scramble up its sides, working his toilsome way through thickets of birch, sassafras, and witch-hazel, and sometimes tripped up or entangled by the wild grapevines that twisted their coils or tendrils from tree to tree, and spread a kind of network in his path.at length he reached to where the ravine had opened through the cliffs to the amphitheatre; but no traces of such opening remained. the rocks presented a high impenetrable wall over which the torrent came tumbling in a sheet of feathery foam, and fell into a broad deep basin, black from the shadows of the surrounding forest. here, then, poor rip was brought to a stand. he again called and whistled after his dog; he was only answered by the cawing of a flock of idle crows, sporting high in air about a dry tree that overhung a sunny precipice; and who, secure in their elevation, seemed to look down and scoff at the poor man's perplexities. what was to be done? the morning was passing away, and rip felt famished for want of his breakfast. he grieved to give up his dog and gun; he dreaded to meet his wife; but it would not do to starve among the mountains. he shook his head, shouldered the rusty firelock, and, with a heart full of trouble and anxiety, turned his steps homeward.as he approached the village he met a number of people, but none whom he knew, which somewhat surprised him, for he had thought himself acquainted with every one in the country round. their dress, too, was of a different fashion from that to which he was accustomed. they all stared at him with equal marks of surprise, and whenever they cast their eyes upon him, invariably stroked their chins. the constant recurrence of this gesture induced rip, involuntarily, to do the same, when to his astonishment, he found his beard had grown a foot long!he had now entered the skirts of the village. a troop of strange children ran at his heels, hooting after him, and pointing at his gray beard. the dogs, too, not one of which he recognized for an old acquaintance, barked at him as he passed. the very village was altered; it was larger and more populous. there were rows of houses which he had never seen before, and those which had been his familiar haunts had disappeared. strange names were over the doors - strange faces at the windows - every thing was strange. his mind now misgave him; he began to doubt whether both he and the world around him were not bewitched. surely this was his native village, which he had left but the day before. there stood the kaatskill mountains - there ran the silver hudson at a distance - there was every hill and dale precisely as it had always been - rip was sorely perplexed - "that flagon last night," thought he, "has addled my poor head sadly!"it was with some difficulty that he found the way to his own house, which he approached with silent awe, expecting every moment to hear the shrill voice of dame van winkle. he found the house gone to decay - the roof fallen in, the windows shattered, and the doors off the hinges. a half-starved dog that looked like wolf was skulking about it. rip called him by name, but the cur snarled, showed his teeth, and passed on. this was an unkind cut indeed - "my very dog," sighed poor rip, "has forgotten me!"he entered the house, which, to tell the truth, dame van winkle had always kept in neat order. it was empty, forlorn, and apparently abandoned. this desolateness overcame all his connubial fears - he called loudly for his wife and children - the lonely chambers rang for a moment with his voice, and then all again was silence.he now hurried forth, and hastened to his old resort, the village inn - but it too was gone. a large rickety wooden building stood in its place, with great gaping windows, some of them broken and mended with old hats and petticoats, and over the door was painted, "the union hotel, by jonathan doolittle." instead of the great tree that used to shelter the quiet little dutch inn of yore, there now was reared a tall naked pole, with something on the top that looked like a red night-cap, and from it was fluttering a flag, on which was a singular assemblage of stars and stripes - all this was strange and incomprehensible. he recognized on the sign, however, the ruby face of king george, under which he had smoked so many a peaceful pipe; but even this was singularly metamorphosed. the red coat was changed for one of blue and buff, a sword was held in the hand instead of a sceptre, the head was decorated with a cocked hat, and underneath was painted in large characters, general washington.there was, as usual, a crowd of folk about the door, but none that rip recollected. the very character of the people seemed changed. there was a busy, bustling, disputatious tone about it, instead of the accustomed phlegm and drowsy tranquillity. he looked in vain for the sage nicholas vedder, with his broad face, double chin, and fair long pipe, uttering clouds of tobacco-smoke instead of idle speeches; or van bummel, the schoolmaster, doling forth the contents of an ancient newspaper. in place of these, a lean, bilious-looking fellow, with his pockets full of handbills, was haranguing vehemently about rights of citizens - elections - members of congress - liberty - bunker's hill - heroes of seventy-six - and other words, which were a perfect babylonish jargon to the bewildered van winkle.the appearance of rip, with his long grizzled beard, his rusty fowling-piece, his uncouth dress, and an army of women and children at his heels, soon attracted the attention of the tavern politicians. they crowded round him, eyeing him from head to foot with great curiosity. the orator bustled up to him, and, drawing him partly aside, inquired "on which side he voted?" rip stared in vacant stupidity. another short but busy little fellow pulled him by the arm, and, rising on tiptoe, inquired in his ear, "whether he was federal or democrat?" rip was equally at a loss to comprehend the question; when a knowing, self-important old gentleman, in a sharp cocked hat, made his way through the crowd, putting them to the right and left with his elbows as he passed, and planting himself before van winkle, with one arm akimbo, the other resting on his cane, his keen eyes and sharp hat penetrating, as it were, into his very soul, demanded in an austere tone, "what brought him to the election with a gun on his shoulder, and a mob at his heels, and whether he meant to breed a riot in the village?" - "alas! gentlemen," cried rip, somewhat dismayed, "i am a poor quiet man, a native of the place, and a loyal subject of the king, god bless him!"here a general shout burst from the by-standers - "a tory! a tory! a spy! a refugee! hustle him! away with him!" it was with great difficulty that the self-important man in the cocked hat restored order; and, having assumed a tenfold austerity of brow, demanded again of the unknown culprit, what he came there for, and whom he was seeking? the poor man humbly assured him that he meant no harm, but merely came there in search of some of his neighbors, who used to keep about the tavern."well - who are they? - name them."rip bethought himself a moment, and inquired, "where's nicholas vedder?"there was a silence for a little while, when an old man replied, in a thin piping voice, "nicholas vedder! why, he is dead and gone these eighteen years! there was a wooden tombstone in the church-yard that used to tell all about him, but that's rotten and gone too.""where's brom dutcher?""oh, he went off to the army in the beginning of the war; some say he was killed at the storming of stony point - others say he was drowned in a squall at the foot of antony's nose. i don't know - he never came back again.""where's van bummel, the schoolmaster?""he went off to the wars too, was a great militia general, and is now in congress."rip's heart died away at hearing of these sad changes in his home and friends, and finding himself thus alone in the world. every answer puzzled him too, by treating of such enormous lapses of time, and of matters which he could not understand: war - congress - stony point; - he had no courage to ask after any more friends, but cried out in despair, "does nobody here know rip van winkle?""oh, rip van winkle!" exclaimed two or three, "oh, to be sure! that's rip van winkle yonder, leaning against the tree."rip looked, and beheld a precise counterpart of himself, as he went up the mountain: apparently as lazy, and certainly as ragged. the poor fellow was now completely confounded. he doubted his own identity, and whether he was himself or another man. in the midst of his bewilderment, the man in the cocked hat demanded who he was, and what was his name?"god knows," exclaimed he, at his wit's end; "i'm not myself - i'm somebody else - that's me yonder - no - that's somebody else got into my shoes - i was myself last night, but i fell asleep on the mountain, and they've changed my gun, and every thing's changed, and i'm changed, and i can't tell what's my name, or who i am!"the by-standers began now to look at each other, nod, wink significantly, and tap their fingers against their foreheads. there was a whisper also, about securing the gun, and keeping the old fellow from doing mischief, at the very suggestion of which the self-important man in the cocked hat retired with some precipitation. at this critical moment a fresh comely woman pressed through the throng to get a peep at the gray-bearded man. she had a chubby child in her arms, which, frightened at his looks, began to cry. "hush, rip," cried she, "hush, you little fool; the old man won't hurt you." the name of the child, the air of the mother, the tone of her voice, all awakened a train of recollections in his mind. "what is your name, my good woman?" asked he."judith gardenier.""and your father's name?""ah, poor man, rip van winkle was his name, but it's twenty years since he went away from home with his gun, and never has been heard of since - his dog came home without him; but whether he shot himself, or was carried away by the indians, nobody can tell. i was then but a little girl."rip had but one question more to ask; but he put it with a faltering voice:"where's your mother?""oh, she too had died but a short time since; she broke a blood-vessel in a fit of passion at a new-england peddler."there was a drop of comfort, at least, in this intelligence. the honest man could contain himself no longer. he caught his daughter and her child in his arms. "i am your father!" cried he - "young rip van winkle once - old rip van winkle now! - does nobody know poor rip van winkle?"all stood amazed, until an old woman, tottering out from among the crowd, put her hand to her brow, and peering under it in his face for a moment, exclaimed, "sure enough! it is rip van winkle - it is himself! welcome home again, old neighbor - why, where have you been these twenty long years?"rip's story was soon told, for the whole twenty years had been to him but as one night. the neighbors stared when they heard it; some were seen to wink at each other, and put their tongues in their cheeks: and the self-important man in the cocked hat, who, when the alarm was over, had returned to the field, screwed down the corners of his mouth, and shook his head - upon which there was a general shaking of the head throughout the assemblage.it was determined, however, to take the opinion of old peter vanderdonk, who was seen slowly advancing up the road. he was a descendant of the historian of that name, who wrote one of the earliest accounts of the province. peter was the most ancient inhabitant of the village, and well versed in all the wonderful events and traditions of the neighborhood. he recollected rip at once, and corroborated his story in the most satisfactory manner. he assured the company that it was a fact, handed down from his ancestor the historian, that the kaatskill mountains had always been haunted by strange beings. that it was affirmed that the great hendrick hudson, the first discoverer of the river and country, kept a kind of vigil there every twenty years, with his crew of the half-moon; being permitted in this way to revisit the scenes of his enterprise, and keep a guardian eye upon the river, and the great city called by his name. that his father had once seen them in their old dutch dresses playing at nine-pins in a hollow of the mountain; and that he himself had heard, one summer afternoon, the sound of their balls, like distant peals of thunder.to make a long story short, the company broke up, and returned to the more important concerns of the election. rip's daughter took him home to live with her; she had a snug, well-furnished house, and a stout cheery farmer for a husband, whom rip recollected for one of the urchins that used to climb upon his back. as to rip's son and heir, who was the ditto of himself, seen leaning against the tree, he was employed to work on the farm; but evinced an hereditary disposition to attend to anything else but his business.rip now resumed his old walks and habits; he soon found many of his former cronies, though all rather the worse for the wear and tear of time; and preferred making friends among the rising generation, with whom he soon grew into great favor.having nothing to do at home, and being arrived at that happy age when a man can be idle with impunity, he took his place once more on the bench at the inn door, and was reverenced as one of the patriarchs of the village, and a chronicle of the old times "before the war." it was some time before he could get into the regular track of gossip, or could be made to comprehend the strange events that had taken place during his torpor. how that there had been a revolutionary war - that the country had thrown off the yoke of old england - and that, instead of being a subject of his majesty george the third, he was now a free citizen of the united states. rip, in fact, was no politician; the changes of states and empires made but little impression on him; but there was one species of despotism under which he had long groaned, and that was - petticoat government. happily that was at an end; he had got his neck out of the yoke of matrimony, and could go in and out whenever he pleased, without dreading the tyranny of dame van winkle. whenever her name was mentioned, however, he shook his head, shrugged his shoulders, and cast up his eyes; which might pass either for an expression of resignation to his fate, or joy at his deliverance.he used to tell his story to every stranger that arrived at mr. doolittle's hotel. he was observed, at first, to vary on some points every time he told it, which was, doubtless, owing to his having so recently awaked. it at last settled down precisely to the tale i have related, and not a man, woman, or child in the neighborhood, but knew it by heart. some always pretended to doubt the reality of it, and insisted that rip had been out of his head, and that this was one point on which he always remained flighty. the old dutch inhabitants, however, almost universally gave it full credit. even to this day they never hear a thunderstorm of a summer afternoon about the kaatskill, but they say hendrick hudson and his crew are at their game of nine-pins; and it is a common wish of all hen-pecked husbands in the neighborhood, when life hangs heavy on their hands, that they might have a quieting draught out of rip van winkle's flagon.note - the foregoing tale, one would suspect, had been suggested to mr. knickerbocker by a little german superstition about the emperor frederick der rothbart, and the kypphauser mountain: the subjoined note, however, which he had appended to the tale, shows that it is an absolute fact, narrated with his usual fidelity:"the story of rip van winkle may seem incredible to many, but nevertheless i give it my full belief, for i know the vicinity of our old dutch settlements to have been very subject to marvellous events and appearances. indeed, i have heard many stranger stories than this, in the villages along the hudson; all of which were too well authenticated to admit of a doubt. i have even talked with rip van winkle myself who, when last i saw him, was a very venerable old man, and so perfectly rational and consistent on every other point, that i think no conscientious person could refuse to take this into the bargain; nay, i have seen a certificate on the subject taken before a country justice and signed with a cross, in the justice's own handwriting. the story, therefore, is beyond the possibility of doubt. d. k."sorry. someone objected to this story being on this site so we had to remove it.without, the night was cold and wet, but in the small parlor of lakesnam villa the blinds were drawn and the fire burned brightly. father and son were at chess, the former, who possessed ideas about the game involving radical changes, putting his king into such sharp and unnecessary perils that it even provoked comment from the whitehaired old lady knitting placidly by the fire."hark at the wind," said mr. white, who, having seen a fatal  mistake after it was too late, was amiably desirous of preventing his son from seeing it."i'm listening," said the latter, grimly surveying the board as he  stretched out his hand. "check.""i should hardly think that he'd come tonight," said his father,  with his hand poised over the board."mate," replied the son."that's the worst of living so far out," bawled mr. white, with  sudden and unlooked-for violence; "of all the beastly, slushy,  out-of-the-way places to live in, this is the worst. pathway's a bog,  and the road's a torrent. i don't know what people are thinking about.  i suppose because only two houses on the road are let, they think it  doesn't matter.""never mind, dear," said his wife soothingly; "perhaps you'll win  the next one."mr. white looked up sharply, just in time to intercept a knowing   glance between mother and son. the words died away on his lips, and  he hid a guilty grin in his thin grey beard."there he is," said herbert white, as the gate banged to loudly and  heavy footsteps came toward the door.the old man rose with hospitable haste, and opening the door, was  heard condoling with the new arrival. the new arrival also condoled  with himself, so that mrs. white said, "tut, tut!" and coughed gently as  her husband entered the room, followed by a tall, burly man, beady of  eye and rubicund of visage."sergeant major morris," he said, introducing him.the sergeant major shook hands, and taking the proffered seat by  the fire, watched contentedly while his host got out whisky and  tumblers and stood a small copper kettle on the fire.at the third glass his eyes got brighter, and he began to talk, the little  family circle regarding with eager interest this visitor from distant parts,  as he squared his broad shoulders in the chair and spoke of strange  scenes and doughty deeds, of wars and plagues and strange peoples."twenty-one years of it," said mr. white, nodding at his wife and  son. "when he went away he was a slip of a youth in the warehouse.  now look at him.""he don't look to have taken much harm," said mrs. white politely.  "i'd like to go to india myself," said the old man, "just to look round  a bit, you know.""better where you are," said the sergeant major, shaking his head.  he put down the empty glass, and sighing softly, shook it again."i should like to see those old temples and fakirs and jugglers," said the old man. "what was that you started telling me the other day about a monkey's paw or something, morris?""nothing," said the soldier hastily. "leastways, nothing worth  hearing.""monkey's paw?" said mrs. white curiously."well, it's just a bit of what you might call magic, perhaps," said the sergeant major offhandedly.his three listeners leaned forward eagerly. the visitor  absentmindedly put his empty glass to his lips and then set it down  again. his host filled it for him."to look at," said the sergeant major, fumbling in his pocket, "it's just an ordinary little paw, dried to a mummy."he took something out of his pocket and proffered it. mrs. white  drew back with a grimace, but her son, taking it, examined it curiously."and what is there special about it?" inquired mr. white, as he took  it from his son, and having examined it, placed it upon the table."it had a spell put on it by an old fakir," said the sergeant major, "a  very holy man. he wanted to show that fate ruled people's lives, and  that those who interfered with it did so to their sorrow. he put a spell  on it so that three separate men could each have three wishes from it."his manner was so impressive that his hearers were conscious that  their light laughter jarred somewhat."well, why don't you have three, sir?" said herbert white cleverly.the soldier regarded him in the way that middle age is wont to  regard presumptuous youth. "i have," he said quietly, and his blotchy face whitened."and did you really have the three wishes granted?" asked mrs.  white."i did," said the sergeant major, and his glass tapped against his  strong teeth."and has anybody else wished?" inquired the old lady."the first man had his three wishes, yes," was the reply. "i don't  know what the first two were, but the third was for death. that's how i got the paw."his tones were so grave that a hush fell upon the group."if you've had your three wishes, it's no good to you now, then,  morris," said the old man at last. "what do you keep it for?"the soldier shook his head. "fancy, i suppose," he said slowly. "i  did have some idea of selling it, but i don't think i will. it has caused  enough mischief already. besides, people won't buy. they think it's a  fairy tale, some of them, and those who do think anything of it want to try it first and pay me afterward.""if you could have another three wishes," said the old man, eyeing  him keenly, "would you have them?""i don't know," said the other. "i don't know."he took the paw, and dangling it between his front finger and   thumb, suddenly threw it upon the fire. white, with a slight cry,  stooped down and snatched it off."better let it burn," said the soldier solemnly."if you don't want it, morris," said the old man, "give it to me.""i won't," said his friend doggedly. "i threw it on the fire. if you keep it, don't blame me for what happens. pitch it on the fire again, like a sensible man."the other shook his head and examined his new possession closely. "how do you do it?" he inquired."hold it up in your right hand and wish aloud," said the sergeant  major, "but i warn you of the consequences.""sounds like the arabian nights," said mrs. white, as she rose and began to set the supper. "don't you think you might wish for four pairs of hands for me?"her husband drew the talisman from his pocket and then all three  burst into laughter as the sergeant major, with a look of alarm on his face, caught him by the arm."if you must wish," he said gruffly, "wish for something sensible."mr. white dropped it back into his pocket, and placing chairs,  motioned his friend to the table. in the business of supper the  talisman was partly forgotten, and afterward the three sat listening in an enthralled fashion to a second installment of the soldier's adventures in india."if the tale about the monkey's paw is not more truthful than those  he has been telling us," said herbert, as the door closed behind their guest, just in time for him to catch the last train, "we shan't make much out of it.""did you give him anything for it, father?" inquired mrs. white,  regarding her husband closely."a trifle," said he, coloring slightly. "he didn't want it, but i made him take it. and he pressed me again to throw it away.""likely," said herbert, with pretended horror. "why, we're going  to be rich, and famous, and happy. wish to be an emperor, father, to begin with; then you can't be henpecked."he darted around the table, pursued by the maligned mrs. white  armed with an antimacassar.mr. white took the paw from his pocket and eyed it dubiously. "i  don't know what to wish for, and that's a fact," he said slowly. "it seems to me i've got all i want.""if you only cleared the house, you'd be quite happy, wouldn't  you?" said herbert, with his hand on his shoulder. "well, wish for  two hundred pounds, then; that'll just do it."his father, smiling shamefacedly at his own credulity, held up the  talisman, as his son, with a solemn face somewhat marred by a wink  at his mother, sat down at the piano and struck a few impressive  chords."i wish for two hundred pounds," said the old man distinctly.a fine crash from the piano greeted the words, interrupted by a  shuddering cry from the old man. his wife and son ran toward him."it moved," he cried, with a glance of disgust at the object as it  lay on the floor. "as i wished, it twisted in my hand like a snake.""well, i don't see the money," said his son, as he picked it up and  placed it on the table, "and i bet i never shall.""it must have been your fancy, father," said his wife, regarding  him anxiously.he shook his head. "never mind, though; there's no harm done,  but it gave me a shock all the same."they sat down by the fire again while the two men finished their  pipes. outside, the wind was higher than ever, and the old man  started nervously at the sound of a door banging upstairs. a silence unusual and depressing settled upon all three, which lasted until the old couple rose to retire for the night."i expect you'll find the cash tied up in a big bag in the middle of your bed," said herbert, as he bade them good night, "and something horrible squatting up on top of the wardrobe watching you as you pocket your ill-gotten gains.". . .in the brightness of the wintry sun next morning as it streamed  over the breakfast table, herbert laughed at his fears. there was an air of prosaic wholesomeness about the room which it had lacked on the previous night, and the dirty, shriveled little paw was pitched on the sideboard with a carelessness which betokened no great belief in its virtues."i suppose all old soldiers are the same," said mrs. white. "the idea of our listening to such nonsense! how could wishes be granted in these days? and if they could, how could two hundred pounds hurt  you, father?""might drop on his head from the sky," said the frivolous herbert."morris said the things happened so naturally," said his father, "that you might, if you so wished, attribute it to coincidence.""well, don't break into the money before i come back," said  herbert, as he rose from the table. "i'm afraid it'll turn you into a mean, avaricious man, and we shall have to disown you."his mother laughed, and following him to the door, watched him  down the road, and returning to the breakfast table, was very happy at the expense of her husband's credulity. all of which did not prevent her from scurrying to the door at the postman's knock, nor prevent her from referring somewhat shortly to retired sergeant majors of bibulous habits, when she found that the post brought a tailor's bill."herbert will have some more of his funny remarks, i expect, when  he comes home," she said, as they sat at dinner."i daresay," said mr. white, pouring himself out some beer; "but for all that, the thing moved in my hand; that i'll swear to.""you thought it did," said the old lady soothingly."i say it did," replied the other. "there was no thought about it; i had just-- what's the matter?"his wife made no reply. she was watching the mysterious  movements of a man outside, who, peering in an undecided fashion at the house, appeared to be trying to make up his mind to enter. in  mental connection with the two hundred pounds, she noticed that the  stranger was well dressed and wore a silk hat of glossy newness. three times he paused at the gate, and then walked on again. the fourth time he stood with his hand upon it, and then with sudden resolution flung it open and walked up the path. mrs. white at the same moment placed her hands behind her, and hurriedly unfastening the strings of her apron, put that useful article of apparel beneath the cushion of her chair.she brought the stranger, who seemed ill at ease, into the room. he  gazed furtively at mrs. white, and listened in a preoccupied fashion as the old lady apologized for the appearance of the room, and her husband's coat, a garment which he usually reserved for the garden. she then waited as patiently as her sex would permit for him to broach his business, but he was at first strangely silent."i--was asked to call," he said at last, and stooped and picked a piece  of cotton from his trousers. "i come from maw and meggins."the old lady started. "is anything the matter?" she asked  breathlessly. "has anything happened to herbert? what is it? what is it?"her husband interposed. "there, there, mother," he said hastily. "sit down, and don't jump to conclusions. you've not brought bad news, i'm sure, sir," and he eyed the other wistfully."i'm sorry--" began the visitor."is he hurt?" demanded the mother.the visitor bowed in assent. "badly hurt," he said quietly, "but he is not in any pain.""oh, thank god!" said the old woman, clasping her hands. "thank  god for that! thank--"she broke off suddenly as the sinister meaning of the assurance  dawned upon her and she saw the awful confirmation of her fears in  the other's averted face. she caught her breath, and turning to her  slower-witted husband, laid her trembling old hand upon his. there  was a long silence."he was caught in the machinery," said the visitor at length, in a low voice."caught in the machinery," repeated mr. white, in a dazed fashion,  "yes."he sat staring blankly out at the window, and taking his wife's hand between his own, pressed it as he had been wont to do in their old  courting days nearly forty years before."he was the only one left to us," he said, turning gently to the  visitor. "it is hard."the other coughed, and rising, walked slowly to the window. "the  firm wished me to convey their sincere sympathy with you in your  great loss," he said, without looking around. "i beg that you will  understand i am only their servant and merely obeying orders."there was no reply; the old woman's face was white, her eyes  staring, and her breath inaudible; on the husband's face was a look  such as his friend the sergeant might have carried into his first action."i was to say that maw and meggins disclaim all responsibility,"  continued the other. "they admit no liability at all, but in  consideration of your son's services they wish to present you with a certain sum as compensation."mr. white dropped his wife's hand, and rising to his feet, gazed  with a look of horror at his visitor. his dry lips shaped the words, "how much?""two hundred pounds," was the answer.unconscious of his wife's shriek, the old man smiled faintly, put  out his hands like a sightless man, and dropped, a senseless heap, to the floor.. . .in the huge new cemetery, some two miles distant, the old people  buried their dead, and came back to a house steeped in shadow and  silence. it was all over so quickly that at first they could hardly  realize it, and remained in a state of expectation, as though of  something else to happen--something else which was to lighten this  load, too heavy for old hearts to bear. but the days passed, and  expectation gave place to resignation--the hopeless resignation of the old, sometimes miscalled apathy. sometimes they hardly exchanged a word, for now they had nothing to talk about, and their days were long to weariness.it was about a week after that that the old man, waking suddenly  in the night, stretched out his hand and found himself alone. the  room was in darkness, and the sound of subdued weeping came from  the window. he raised himself in bed and listened."come back," he said tenderly. "you will be cold.""it is colder for my son," said the old woman, and wept afresh.the sound of her sobs died away on his ears. the bed was -warm,  and his eyes heavy with sleep. he dozed fitfully, and then slept until  a sudden cry from his wife awoke him with a start."the monkey's paw!" she cried wildly. "the monkey's paw!"he started up in alarm. "where? where is it? what's the matter?"  she came stumbling across the room toward him. "i want it," she  said quietly. "you've not destroyed it?""it's in the parlor, on the bracket," he replied, marveling. "why?"she cried and laughed together, and bending over, kissed his  cheek."i only just thought of it," she said hysterically. "why didn't i  think of it before? why didn't you think of it?""think of what?" he questioned."the other two wishes," she replied rapidly. "we've only had one.""was not that enough?" he demanded fiercely."no," she cried triumphantly; "we'll have one more. go down and  get it quickly, and wish our boy alive again."the man sat up in bed and flung the bedclothes from his quaking  limbs. "good god, you are mad!" he cried, aghast."get it," she panted; "get it quickly, and wish-- oh, my boy, my  boy!"her husband struck a match and lit the candle. "get back to bed," he said unsteadily. "you don't know what you are saying.""we had the first wish granted," said the old woman feverishly;  "why not the second?""a coincidence," stammered the old man."go and get it and wish," cried the old woman, and dragged him  toward the door.he went down in the darkness, and felt his way to the parlor, and  then to the mantelpiece. the talisman was in its place, and a horrible fear that the unspoken wish might bring his mutilated son before him ere he could escape from the room seized upon him, and he caught his breath as he found that he had lost the direction of the door. his brow cold with sweat, he felt his way around the table, and groped along the wall until he found himself in the small passage with the unwholesome thing in his hand.even his wife's face seemed changed as he entered the room. it  was white and expectant, and to his fears seemed to have an unnatural look upon it. he was afraid of her."wish!" she cried, in a strong voice."it is foolish and wicked," he faltered."wish!" repeated his wife.he raised his hand. "i wish my son alive again."the talisman fell to the floor, and he regarded it shudderingly.  then he sank trembling into a chair as the old woman, with burning  eyes, walked to the window and raised the blind.he sat until he was chilled with the cold, glancing occasionally at  the figure of the old woman peering through the window. the candle  end, which had burned below the rim of the china candlestick, was  throwing pulsating shadows on the ceiling and walls, until, with a  flicker larger than the rest, it expired. the old man, with an  unspeakable sense of relief at the failure of the talisman, crept back to his bed, and a minute or two afterward the old woman came  silently and apathetically beside him.neither spoke, but both lay silently listening to the ticking of the clock. a stair creaked, and a squeaky mouse scurried noisily through the wall. the darkness was oppressive, and after lying for some time screwing up his courage, the husband took the box of matches, and striking one, went downstairs for a candle.at the foot of the stairs the match went out, and he paused to  strike another, and at the same moment a knock, so quiet and  stealthy as to be scarcely audible, sounded on the front door.the matches fell from his hand. he stood motionless, his breath  suspended until the knock was repeated. then he turned and fled  swiftly back to his room, and closed the door behind him. a third  knock sounded through the house."what's that?" cried the old woman, starting up."a rat," said the old man, in shaking tones, "a rat. it passed me on the stairs."his wife sat up in bed listening. a loud knock resounded through  the house."it's herbert!" she screamed. "it's herbert!"she ran to the door, but her husband was before her, and catching  her by the arm, held her tightly."what are you going to do?" he whispered hoarsely."it's my boy; it's herbert!" she cried, struggling mechanically. "i  forgot it was two miles away. what are you holding me for? let go. i must open the door.""for god's sake don't let it in," cried the old man, trembling."you're afraid of your own son," she cried, struggling. "let me go. i'm coming, herbert; i'm coming."there was another knock, and another. the old woman with a sudden wrench broke free and ran from the room. her husband followed to the landing, and called after her appealingly as she hurried downstairs. he heard the chain rattle back and the bottom bolt drawn slowly and stiffly from the socket. then the old woman's voice, strained and panting."the bolt," she cried loudly. "come down. i can't reach it."but her husband was on his hands and knees groping wildly on the  floor in search of the paw. if he could only find it before the thing outside got in. a perfect fusillade of knocks reverberated through the house, and he heard the scraping of a chair as his wife put it down in the passage against the door. he heard the creaking of the bolt as it came slowly back, and at the same moment, he found the monkey's paw, and frantically breathed his third and last wish.the knocking ceased suddenly, although the echoes of it were still  in the house. he heard the chair drawn back and the door opened. a  cold wind rushed up the staircase, and a long, loud wail of  disappointment and misery from his wife gave him courage to run  down to her side, and then to the gate beyond. the streetlamp  flickering opposite shone on a quiet and deserted road.north richmond street, being blind, was a quiet street except at the hour when the christian brothers' school set the boys free. an uninhabited house of two storeys stood at the blind end, detached from its neighbours in a square ground. the other houses of the street, conscious of decent lives within them, gazed at one another with brown imperturbable faces.the former tenant of our house, a priest, had died in the back drawing-room. air, musty from having been long enclosed, hung in all the rooms, and the waste room behind the kitchen was littered with old useless papers. among these i found a few paper-covered books, the pages of which were curled and damp: the abbot, by walter scott, the devout communicant, and the memoirs of vidocq. i liked the last best because its leaves were yellow. the wild garden behind the house contained a central apple-tree and a few straggling bushes, under one of which i found the late tenant's rusty bicycle-pump. he had been a very charitable priest; in his will he had left all his money to institutions and the furniture of his house to his sister.when the short days of winter came, dusk fell before we had well eaten our dinners. when we met in the street the houses had grown sombre. the space of sky above us was the colour of ever-changing violet and towards it the lamps of the street lifted their feeble lanterns. the cold air stung us and we played till our bodies glowed. our shouts echoed in the silent street. the career of our play brought us through the dark muddy lanes behind the houses, where we ran the gauntlet of the rough tribes from the cottages, to the back doors of the dark dripping gardens where odours arose from the ashpits, to the dark odorous stables where a coachman smoothed and combed the horse or shook music from the buckled harness. when we returned to the street, light from the kitchen windows had filled the areas. if my uncle was seen turning the corner, we hid in the shadow until we had seen him safely housed. or if mangan's sister came out on the doorstep to call her brother in to his tea, we watched her from our shadow peer up and down the street. we waited to see whether she would remain or go in and, if she remained, we left our shadow and walked up to mangan's steps resignedly. she was waiting for us, her figure defined by the light from the half-opened door. her brother always teased her before he obeyed, and i stood by the railings looking at her. her dress swung as she moved her body, and the soft rope of her hair tossed from side to side.every morning i lay on the floor in the front parlour watching her door. the blind was pulled down to within an inch of the sash so that i could not be seen. when she came out on the doorstep my heart leaped. i ran to the hall, seized my books and followed her. i kept her brown figure always in my eye and, when we came near the point at which our ways diverged, i quickened my pace and passed her. this happened morning after morning. i had never spoken to her, except for a few casual words, and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood.her image accompanied me even in places the most hostile to romance. on saturday evenings when my aunt went marketing i had to go to carry some of the parcels. we walked through the flaring streets, jostled by drunken men and bargaining women, amid the curses of labourers, the shrill litanies of shop-boys who stood on guard by the barrels of pigs' cheeks, the nasal chanting of street-singers, who sang a come-all-you about o'donovan rossa, or a ballad about the troubles in our native land. these noises converged in a single sensation of life for me: i imagined that i bore my chalice safely through a throng of foes. her name sprang to my lips at moments in strange prayers and praises which i myself did not understand. my eyes were often full of tears i could not tell why and at times a flood from my heart seemed to pour itself out into my bosom. i thought little of the future. i did not know whether i would ever speak to her or not or, if i spoke to her, how i could tell her of my confused adoration. but my body was like a harp and her words and gestures were like fingers running upon the wires.one evening i went into the back drawing-room in which the priest had died. it was a dark rainy evening and there was no sound in the house. through one of the broken panes i heard the rain impinge upon the earth, the fine incessant needles of water playing in the sodden beds. some distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me. i was thankful that i could see so little. all my senses seemed to desire to veil themselves and, feeling that i was about to slip from them, i pressed the palms of my hands together until they trembled, murmuring: 'o love! o love!' many times.at last she spoke to me. when she addressed the first words to me i was so confused that i did not know what to answer. she asked me was i going to araby. i forgot whether i answered yes or no. it would be a splendid bazaar; she said she would love to go.'and why can't you?' i asked.while she spoke she turned a silver bracelet round and round her wrist. she could not go, she said, because there would be a retreat that week in her convent. her brother and two other boys were fighting for their caps, and i was alone at the railings. she held one of the spikes, bowing her head towards me. the light from the lamp opposite our door caught the white curve of her neck, lit up her hair that rested there and, falling, lit up the hand upon the railing. it fell over one side of her dress and caught the white border of a petticoat, just visible as she stood at ease.'it's well for you,' she said.'if i go,' i said, 'i will bring you something.'what innumerable follies laid waste my waking and sleeping thoughts after that evening! i wished to annihilate the tedious intervening days. i chafed against the work of school. at night in my bedroom and by day in the classroom her image came between me and the page i strove to read. the syllables of the word araby were called to me through the silence in which my soul luxuriated and cast an eastern enchantment over me. i asked for leave to go to the bazaar on saturday night. my aunt was surprised, and hoped it was not some freemason affair. i answered few questions in class. i watched my master's face pass from amiability to sternness; he hoped i was not beginning to idle. i could not call my wandering thoughts together. i had hardly any patience with the serious work of life which, now that it stood between me and my desire, seemed to me child's play, ugly monotonous child's play.on saturday morning i reminded my uncle that i wished to go to the bazaar in the evening. he was fussing at the hallstand, looking for the hat-brush, and answered me curtly:'yes, boy, i know.'as he was in the hall i could not go into the front parlour and lie at the window. i felt the house in bad humour and walked slowly towards the school. the air was pitilessly raw and already my heart misgave me.when i came home to dinner my uncle had not yet been home. still it was early. i sat staring at the clock for some time and, when its ticking began to irritate me, i left the room. i mounted the staircase and gained the upper part of the house. the high, cold, empty, gloomy rooms liberated me and i went from room to room singing. from the front window i saw my companions playing below in the street. their cries reached me weakened and indistinct and, leaning my forehead against the cool glass, i looked over at the dark house where she lived. i may have stood there for an hour, seeing nothing but the brown-clad figure cast by my imagination, touched discreetly by the lamplight at the curved neck, at the hand upon the railings and at the border below the dress.when i came downstairs again i found mrs mercer sitting at the fire. she was an old, garrulous woman, a pawnbroker's widow, who collected used stamps for some pious purpose. i had to endure the gossip of the tea-table. the meal was prolonged beyond an hour and still my uncle did not come. mrs mercer stood up to go: she was sorry she couldn't wait any longer, but it was after eight o'clock and she did not like to be out late, as the night air was bad for her. when she had gone i began to walk up and down the room, clenching my fists. my aunt said:'i'm afraid you may put off your bazaar for this night of our lord.'at nine o'clock i heard my uncle's latchkey in the hall door. i heard him talking to himself and heard the hallstand rocking when it had received the weight of his overcoat. i could interpret these signs. when he was midway through his dinner i asked him to give me the money to go to the bazaar. he had forgotten.'the people are in bed and after their first sleep now,' he said.i did not smile. my aunt said to him energetically:'can't you give him the money and let him go? you've kept him late enough as it is.'my uncle said he was very sorry he had forgotten. he said he believed in the old saying: 'all work and no play makes jack a dull boy.' he asked me where i was going and, when i told him a second time, he asked me did i know the arab's farewell to his steed. when i left the kitchen he was about to recite the opening lines of the piece to my aunt.i held a florin tightly in my hand as i strode down buckingham street towards the station. the sight of the streets thronged with buyers and glaring with gas recalled to me the purpose of my journey. i took my seat in a third-class carriage of a deserted train. after an intolerable delay the train moved out of the station slowly. it crept onward among ruinous houses and over the twinkling river. at westland row station a crowd of people pressed to the carriage doors; but the porters moved them back, saying that it was a special train for the bazaar. i remained alone in the bare carriage. in a few minutes the train drew up beside an improvised wooden platform. i passed out on to the road and saw by the lighted dial of a clock that it was ten minutes to ten. in front of me was a large building which displayed the magical name.i could not find any sixpenny entrance and, fearing that the bazaar would be closed, i passed in quickly through a turnstile, handing a shilling to a weary-looking man. i found myself in a big hall girded at half its height by a gallery. nearly all the stalls were closed and the greater part of the hall was in darkness. i recognized a silence like that which pervades a church after a service. i walked into the centre of the bazaar timidly. a few people were gathered about the stalls which were still open. before a curtain, over which the words cafã© chantant were written in coloured lamps, two men were counting money on a salver. i listened to the fall of the coins.remembering with difficulty why i had come, i went over to one of the stalls and examined porcelain vases and flowered tea-sets. at the door of the stall a young lady was talking and laughing with two young gentlemen. i remarked their english accents and listened vaguely to their conversation.'o, i never said such a thing!''o, but you did!''o, but i didn't!''didn't she say that?''yes. i heard her.''o, there's a. . . fib!'observing me, the young lady came over and asked me did i wish to buy anything. the tone of her voice was not encouraging; she seemed to have spoken to me out of a sense of duty. i looked humbly at the great jars that stood like eastern guards at either side of the dark entrance to the stall and murmured:'no, thank you.'the young lady changed the position of one of the vases and went back to the two young men. they began to talk of the same subject. once or twice the young lady glanced at me over her shoulder.i lingered before her stall, though i knew my stay was useless, to make my interest in her wares seem the more real. then i turned away slowly and walked down the middle of the bazaar. i allowed the two pennies to fall against the sixpence in my pocket. i heard a voice call from one end of the gallery that the light was out. the upper part of the hall was now completely dark.gazing up into the darkness i saw myself as a creature driven and derided by vanity; and my eyes burned with anguish and anger.the matron had given her leave to go out as soon as the women's tea was over and maria looked forward to her evening out. the kitchen was spick and span: the cook said you could see yourself in the big copper boilers. the fire was nice and bright and on one of the side-tables were four very big barmbracks. these barmbracks seemed uncut; but if you went closer you would see that they had been cut into long thick even slices and were ready to be handed round at tea. maria had cut them herself.maria was a very, very small person indeed but she had a very long nose and a very long chin. she talked a little through her nose, always soothingly: "yes, my dear," and "no, my dear." she was always sent for when the women quarrelled over their tubs and always succeeded in making peace. one day the matron had said to her:"maria, you are a veritable peace-maker!"and the sub-matron and two of the board ladies had heard the compliment. and ginger mooney was always saying what she wouldn't do to the dummy who had charge of the irons if it wasn't for maria. everyone was so fond of maria.the women would have their tea at six o'clock and she would be able to get away before seven. from ballsbridge to the pillar, twenty minutes; from the pillar to drumcondra, twenty minutes; and twenty minutes to buy the things. she would be there before eight. she took out her purse with the silver clasps and read again the words a present from belfast. she was very fond of that purse because joe had brought it to her five years before when he and alphy had gone to belfast on a whit-monday trip. in the purse were two half-crowns and some coppers. she would have five shillings clear after paying tram fare. what a nice evening they would have, all the children singing! only she hoped that joe wouldn't come in drunk. he was so different when he took any drink.often he had wanted her to go and live with them;-but she would have felt herself in the way though joe's wife was ever so nice with her and she had become accustomed to the life of the laundry. joe was a good fellow. she had nursed him and alphy too; and joe used often say:"mamma is mamma but maria is my proper mother."after the break-up at home the boys had got her that position in the dublin by lamplight laundry, and she liked it. she used to have such a bad opinion of protestants but now she thought they were very nice people, a little quiet and serious, but still very nice people to live with. then she had her plants in the conservatory and she liked looking after them. she had lovely ferns and wax-plants and, whenever anyone came to visit her, she always gave the visitor one or two slips from her conservatory. there was one thing she didn't like and that was the tracts on the walks; but the matron was such a nice person to deal with, so genteel.when the cook told her everything was ready she went into the women's room and began to pull the big bell. in a few minutes the women began to come in by twos and threes, wiping their steaming hands in their petticoats and pulling down the sleeves of their blouses over their red steaming arms. they settled down before their huge mugs which the cook and the dummy filled up with hot tea, already mixed with milk and sugar in huge tin cans. maria superintended the distribution of the barmbrack and saw that every woman got her four slices. there was a great deal of laughing and joking during the meal. lizzie fleming said maria was sure to get the ring and, though fleming had said that for so many hallow eves, maria had to laugh and say she didn't want any ring or man either; and when she laughed her grey-green eyes sparkled with disappointed shyness and the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin. then ginger mooney lifted her mug of tea and proposed maria's health while all the other women clattered with their mugs on the table, and said she was sorry she hadn't a sup of porter to drink it in. and maria laughed again till the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin and till her minute body nearly shook itself asunder because she knew that mooney meant well though, of course, she had the notions of a common woman.but wasn't maria glad when the women had finished their tea and the cook and the dummy had begun to clear away the tea-things! she went into her little bedroom and, remembering that the next morning was a mass morning, changed the hand of the alarm from seven to six. then she took off her working skirt and her house-boots and laid her best skirt out on the bed and her tiny dress-boots beside the foot of the bed. she changed her blouse too and, as she stood before the mirror, she thought of how she used to dress for mass on sunday morning when she was a young girl; and she looked with quaint affection at the diminutive body which she had so often adorned, in spite of its years she found it a nice tidy little body.when she got outside the streets were shining with rain and she was glad of her old brown waterproof. the tram was full and she had to sit on the little stool at the end of the car, facing all the people, with her toes barely touching the floor. she arranged in her mind all she was going to do and thought how much better it was to be independent and to have your own money in your pocket. she hoped they would have a nice evening. she was sure they would but she could not help thinking what a pity it was alphy and joe were not speaking. they were always falling out now but when they were boys together they used to be the best of friends: but such was life.she got out of her tram at the pillar and ferreted her way quickly among the crowds. she went into downes's cake-shop but the shop was so full of people that it was a long time before she could get herself attended to. she bought a dozen of mixed penny cakes, and at last came out of the shop laden with a big bag. then she thought what else would she buy: she wanted to buy something really nice. they would be sure to have plenty of apples and nuts. it was hard to know what to buy and all she could think of was cake. she decided to buy some plumcake but downes's plumcake had not enough almond icing on top of it so she went over to a shop in henry street. here she was a long time in suiting herself and the stylish young lady behind the counter, who was evidently a little annoyed by her, asked her was it wedding-cake she wanted to buy. that made maria blush and smile at the young lady; but the young lady took it all very seriously and finally cut a thick slice of plumcake, parcelled it up and said:"two-and-four, please."she thought she would have to stand in the drumcondra tram because none of the young men seemed to notice her but an elderly gentleman made room for her. he was a stout gentleman and he wore a brown hard hat; he had a square red face and a greyish moustache. maria thought he was a colonel-looking gentleman and she reflected how much more polite he was than the young men who simply stared straight before them. the gentleman began to chat with her about hallow eve and the rainy weather. he supposed the bag was full of good things for the little ones and said it was only right that the youngsters should enjoy themselves while they were young. maria agreed with him and favoured him with demure nods and hems. he was very nice with her, and when she was getting out at the canal bridge she thanked him and bowed, and he bowed to her and raised his hat and smiled agreeably, and while she was going up along the terrace, bending her tiny head under the rain, she thought how easy it was to know a gentleman even when he has a drop taken.everybody said: "0, here's maria!" when she came to joe's house. joe was there, having come home from business, and all the children had their sunday dresses on. there were two big girls in from next door and games were going on. maria gave the bag of cakes to the eldest boy, alphy, to divide and mrs. donnelly said it was too good of her to bring such a big bag of cakes and made all the children say:"thanks, maria."but maria said she had brought something special for papa and mamma, something they would be sure to like, and she began to look for her plumcake. she tried in downes's bag and then in the pockets of her waterproof and then on the hallstand but nowhere could she find it. then she asked all the children had any of them eaten it -- by mistake, of course -- but the children all said no and looked as if they did not like to eat cakes if they were to be accused of stealing. everybody had a solution for the mystery and mrs. donnelly said it was plain that maria had left it behind her in the tram. maria, remembering how confused the gentleman with the greyish moustache had made her, coloured with shame and vexation and disappointment. at the thought of the failure of her little surprise and of the two and fourpence she had thrown away for nothing she nearly cried outright.but joe said it didn't matter and made her sit down by the fire. he was very nice with her. he told her all that went on in his office, repeating for her a smart answer which he had made to the manager. maria did not understand why joe laughed so much over the answer he had made but she said that the manager must have been a very overbearing person to deal with. joe said he wasn't so bad when you knew how to take him, that he was a decent sort so long as you didn't rub him the wrong way. mrs. donnelly played the piano for the children and they danced and sang. then the two next-door girls handed round the nuts. nobody could find the nutcrackers and joe was nearly getting cross over it and asked how did they expect maria to crack nuts without a nutcracker. but maria said she didn't like nuts and that they weren't to bother about her. then joe asked would she take a bottle of stout and mrs. donnelly said there was port wine too in the house if she would prefer that. maria said she would rather they didn't ask her to take anything: but joe insisted.so maria let him have his way and they sat by the fire talking over old times and maria thought she would put in a good word for alphy. but joe cried that god might strike him stone dead if ever he spoke a word to his brother again and maria said she was sorry she had mentioned the matter. mrs. donnelly told her husband it was a great shame for him to speak that way of his own flesh and blood but joe said that alphy was no brother of his and there was nearly being a row on the head of it. but joe said he would not lose his temper on account of the night it was and asked his wife to open some more stout. the two next-door girls had arranged some hallow eve games and soon everything was merry again. maria was delighted to see the children so merry and joe and his wife in such good spirits. the next-door girls put some saucers on the table and then led the children up to the table, blindfold. one got the prayer-book and the other three got the water; and when one of the next-door girls got the ring mrs. donnelly shook her finger at the blushing girl as much as to say: 0, i know all about it! they insisted then on blindfolding maria and leading her up to the table to see what she would get; and, while they were putting on the bandage, maria laughed and laughed again till the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin.they led her up to the table amid laughing and joking and she put her hand out in the air as she was told to do. she moved her hand about here and there in the air and descended on one of the saucers. she felt a soft wet substance with her fingers and was surprised that nobody spoke or took off her bandage. there was a pause for a few seconds; and then a great deal of scuffling and whispering. somebody said something about the garden, and at last mrs. donnelly said something very cross to one of the next-door girls and told her to throw it out at once: that was no play. maria understood that it was wrong that time and so she had to do it over again: and this time she got the prayer-book.after that mrs. donnelly played miss mccloud's reel for the children and joe made maria take a glass of wine. soon they were all quite merry again and mrs. donnelly said maria would enter a convent before the year was out because she had got the prayer-book. maria had never seen joe so nice to her as he was that night, so full of pleasant talk and reminiscences. she said they were all very good to her.at last the children grew tired and sleepy and joe asked maria would she not sing some little song before she went, one of the old songs. mrs. donnelly said "do, please, maria!" and so maria had to get up and stand beside the piano. mrs. donnelly bade the children be quiet and listen to maria's song. then she played the prelude and said "now, maria!" and maria, blushing very much began to sing in a tiny quavering voice. she sang i dreamt that i dwelt, and when she came to the second verse she sang again:i dreamt that i dwelt in marble halls with vassals and serfs at my side, and of all who assembled within those walls that i was the hope and the pride.  i had riches too great to count; could boast of a high ancestral name, but i also dreamt, which pleased me most, that you loved me still the same.but no one tried to show her her mistake; and when she had ended her song joe was very much moved. he said that there was no time like the long ago and no music for him like poor old balfe, whatever other people might say; and his eyes filled up so much with tears that he could not find what he was looking for and in the end he had to ask his wife to tell him where the corkscrew was.eight years before he had seen his friend off at the north wall and wished him god-speed. gallaher had got on. you could tell that at once by his travelled air, his well-cut tweed suit, and fearless accent. few fellows had talents like his, and fewer still could remain unspoiled by such success. gallaher's heart was in the right place and he had deserved to win. it was something to have a friend like that.little chandler's thoughts ever since lunch-time had been of his meeting with gallaher, of gallaher's invitation, and of the great city london where gallaher lived. he was called little chandler because, though he was but slightly under the average stature, he gave one the idea of being a little man. his hands were white and small, his frame was fragile, his voice was quiet and his manners were refined. he took the greatest care of his fair silken hair and moustache, and used perfume discreetly on his handkerchief. the half-moons of his nails were perfect, and when he smiled you caught a glimpse of a row of childish white teeth.as he sat at his desk in the king's inns he thought what changes those eight years had brought. the friend whom he had known under a shabby and necessitous guise had become a brilliant figure on the london press. he turned often from his tiresome writing to gaze out of the office window. the glow of a late autumn sunset covered the grass plots and walks. it cast a shower of kindly golden dust on the untidy nurses and decrepit old men who drowsed on the benches; it flickered upon all the moving figures - on the children who ran screaming along the gravel paths and on everyone who passed through the gardens. he watched the scene and thought of life; and (as always happened when he thought of life) he became sad. a gentle melancholy took possession of him. he felt how useless it was to struggle against fortune, this being the burden of wisdom which the ages had bequeathed to him.he remembered the books of poetry upon his shelves at home. he had bought them in his bachelor days and many an evening, as he sat in the little room off the hall, he had been tempted to take one down from the bookshelf and read out something to his wife. but shyness had always held him back; and so the books had remained on their shelves. at times he repeated lines to himself and this consoled him.when his hour had struck he stood up and took leave of his desk and of his fellow-clerks punctiliously. he emerged from under the feudal arch of the king's inns, a neat modest figure, and walked swiftly down henrietta street. the golden sunset was waning and the air had grown sharp. a horde of grimy children populated the street. they stood or ran in the roadway, or crawled up the steps before the gaping doors, or squatted like mice upon the thresholds. little chandler gave them no thought. he picked his way deftly through all that minute vermin-like life and under the shadow of the gaunt spectral mansions in which the old nobility of dublin had roistered. no memory of the past touched him, for his mind was full of a present joy.he had never been in corless's, but he knew the value of the name. he knew that people went there after the theatre to eat oysters and drink liqueurs; and he had heard that the waiters there spoke french and german. walking swiftly by at night he had seen cabs drawn up before the door and richly-dressed ladies, escorted by cavaliers, alight and enter quickly. they wore noisy dresses and many wraps. their faces were powdered and they caught up their dresses, when they touched earth, like alarmed atalantas. he had always passed without turning his head to look. it was his habit to walk swiftly in the street even by day, and whenever he found himself in the city late at night he hurried on his way apprehensively and excitedly. sometimes, however, he courted the causes of his fear. he chose the darkest and narrowest streets and, as he walked boldly forward, the silence that was spread about his footsteps troubled him; the wandering, silent figures troubled him; and at times a sound of low fugitive laughter made him tremble like a leaf.he turned to the right towards capel street. ignatius gallaher on the london press! who would have thought it possible eight years before? still, now that he reviewed the past, little chandler could remember many signs of future greatness in his friend. people used to say that ignatius gallaher was wild. of course, he did mix with a rakish set of fellows at that time; drank freely and borrowed money on all sides. in the end he had got mixed up in some shady affair, some money transaction: at least, that was one version of his flight. but nobody denied him talent. there was always a certain... something in ignatius gallaher that impressed you in spite of yourself. even when he was out at elbows and at his wits' end for money he kept up a bold face. little chandler remembered (and the remembrance brought a slight flush of pride to his cheek) one of ignatius gallaher's sayings when he was in a tight corner:'half-time now, boys,' he used to say light-heartedly. 'where's my considering cap?'that was ignatius gallaher all out; and, damn it, you couldn't but admire him for it.little chandler quickened his pace. for the first time in his life he felt himself superior to the people he passed. for the first time his soul revolted against the dull inelegance of capel street. there was no doubt about it: if you wanted to succeed you had to go away. you could do nothing in dublin. as he crossed grattan bridge he looked down the river towards the lower quays and pitied the poor stunted houses. they seemed to him a band of tramps, huddled together along the river-banks, their old coats covered with dust and soot, stupefied by the panorama of sunset and waiting for the first chill of night to bid them arise, shake themselves and begone. he wondered whether he could write a poem to express his idea. perhaps gallaher might be able to get it into some london paper for him. could he write something original? he was not sure what idea he wished to express, but the thought that a poetic moment had touched him took life within him like an infant hope. he stepped onward bravely.every step brought him nearer to london, farther from his own sober inartistic life. a light began to tremble on the horizon of his mind. he was not so old - thirty-two. his temperament might be said to be just at the point of maturity. there were so many different moods and impressions that he wished to express in verse. he felt them within him. he tried to weigh his soul to see if it was a poet's soul. melancholy was the dominant note of his temperament, he thought, but it was a melancholy tempered by recurrences of faith and resignation and simple joy. if he could give expression to it in a book of poems perhaps men would listen. he would never be popular: he saw that. he could not sway the crowd, but he might appeal to a little circle of kindred minds. the english critics, perhaps, would recognize him as one of the celtic school by reason of the melancholy tone of his poems; besides that, he would put in allusions. he began to invent sentences and phrases from the notice which his book would get. 'mr chandler has the gift of easy and graceful verse'... 'a wistful sadness pervades these poems'... 'the celtic note'. it was a pity his name was not more irish-looking. perhaps it would be better to insert his mother's name before the surname: thomas malone chandler; or better still: t. malone chandler. he would speak to gallaher about it.he pursued his reverie so ardently that he passed his street and had to turn back. as he came near corless's his former agitation began to overmaster him and he halted before the door in indecision. finally he opened the door and entered.the light and noise of the bar held him at the doorway for a few moments. he looked about him, but his sight was confused by the shining of many red and green wine-glasses. the bar seemed to him to be full of people and he felt that the people were observing him curiously. he glanced quickly to right and left (frowning slightly to make his errand appear serious), but when his sight cleared a little he saw that nobody had turned to look at him: and there, sure enough, was ignatius gallaher leaning with his back against the counter and his feet planted far apart.'hallo, tommy, old hero, here you are! what is it to be? what will you have? i'm taking whisky: better stuff than we get across the water. soda? lithia? no mineral? i'm the same. spoils the flavour... here, garcon, bring us two halves of malt whisky, like a good fellow... well, and how have you been pulling along since i saw you last? dear god, how old we're getting! do you see any signs of ageing in me - eh, what? a little grey and thin on the top - what?'ignatius gallaher took off his hat and displayed a large closely-cropped head. his face was heavy, pale, and clean-shaven. his eyes, which were of bluish slate-colour, relieved his unhealthy pallor and shone out plainly above the vivid orange tie he wore. between these rival features the lips appeared very long and shapeless and colourless. he bent his head and felt with two sympathetic fingers the thin hair at the crown. little chandler shook his head as a denial. ignatius gallaher put on his hat again.'it pulls you down,' he said. 'press life. always hurry and scurry, looking for copy and sometimes not finding it: and then, always to have something new in your stuff. damn proofs and printers, i say, for a few days. i'm deuced glad, i can tell you, to get back to the old country. does a fellow good, a bit of a holiday. i feel a ton better since i landed again in dear, dirty dublin... here you are, tommy. water? say when.'little chandler allowed his whisky to be very much diluted.'you don't know what's good for you, my boy,' said ignatius gallaher. 'i drink mine neat.''i drink very little as a rule,' said little chandler modestly. 'an odd half-one or so when i meet any of the old crowd: that's all.''ah well,' said ignatius gallaher cheerfully, 'here's to us and to old times and old acquaintance.'they clinked glasses and drank the toast.'i met some of the old gang today,' said ignatius gallaher. 'o'hara seems to be in a bad way. what's he doing?''nothing,' said little chandler. 'he's gone to the dogs.''but hogan has a good sit, hasn't he?''yes, be's in the land commission.''i met him one night in london and he seemed to be very flush... poor o'hara! booze, i suppose?''other things, too,' said little chandler shortly.ignatius gallaher laughed.'tommy,' he said, 'i see you haven't changed an atom. you're the very same serious person that used to lecture me on sunday mornings when i had a sore head and a fur on my tongue. you'd want to knock about a bit in the world. have you never been anywhere even for a trip?''i've been to the isle of man,' said little chandler.ignatius gallaher laughed.'the isle of man!' he said. 'go to london or paris: paris, for choice. that'd do you good.''have you seen paris?''i should think i have! i've knocked about there a little.''and is it really so beautiful as they say?' asked little chandler.he sipped a little of his drink while ignatius gallaher finished his boldly.'beautiful?' said ignatius gallaher, pausing on the word and on the flavour of his drink. 'it's not so beautiful, you know. of course it is beautiful... but it's the life of paris; that's the thing. ah, there's no city like paris for gaiety, movement, excitement... 'little chandler finished his whisky and, after some trouble, succeeded in catching the barman's eye. he ordered the same again.'i've been to the moulin rouge,' ignatius gallaher continued when the barman had removed their glasses, 'and i've been to all the bohemian cafes. hot stuff! not for a pious chap like you, tommy.'little chandler said nothing until the barman returned with two glasses: then he touched his friend's glass lightly and reciprocated the former toast. he was beginning to feel somewhat disillusioned. gallaher's accent and way of expressing himself did not please him. there was something vulgar in his friend which lie had not observed before. but perhaps it was only the result of living in london amid the bustle and competition of the press. the old personal charm was still there under this new gaudy manner. and, after all, gallaher had lived, he had seen the world. little chandler looked at his friend enviously.'everything in paris is gay,' said ignatius gallaher. 'they believe in enjoying life - and don't you think they're right? if you want to enjoy yourself properly you must go to paris. and, mind you, they've a great feeling for the irish there. when they heard i was from ireland they were ready to eat me, man.'little chandler took four or five sips from his glass.'tell me,' he said, 'is it true that paris is so... immoral as they say?'ignatius gallaher made a catholic gesture with his right arm.'every place is immoral,' he said. 'of course you do find spicy bits in paris. go to one of the students' balls, for instance. that's lively, if you like, when the cocottes begin to let themselves loose. you know what they are, i suppose?''i've heard of them,' said little chandler.ignatius gallaher drank off his whisky and shook his head.'ah,' he said, 'you may say what you like. there's no woman like the parisienne - for style, for go.''then it is an immoral city,' said little chandler, with timid insistence - 'i mean, compared with london or dublin?''london!' said ignatius gallaher. 'it's six of one and half a dozen of the other. you ask hogan, my boy. i showed him a bit about london when he was over there. he'd open your eye... i say, tommy, don't make punch of that whisky: liquor up.''no, really.''o, come on, another one won't do you any harm. what is it? the same again, i suppose?''well... all right.''francois, the same again... will you smoke, tommy?'ignatius gallaher produced his cigar-case. the two friends lit their cigars and puffed at them in silence until their drinks were served.'i'll tell you my opinion,' said ignatius gallaher, emerging after some time from the clouds of smoke in which he had taken refuge, 'it's a rum world. talk of immorality! i've heard of cases - what am i saying? - i've known them: cases of... immorality... 'ignatius gallaher puffed thoughtfully at his cigar and then, in a calm historian's tone, he proceeded to sketch for his friend some pictures of the corruption which was rife abroad. he summarized the vices of many capitals and seemed inclined to award the palm to berlin. some things he could not vouch for (his friends had told him), but of others he had had personal experience. he spared neither rank nor caste. he revealed many of the secrets of religious houses on the continent and described some of the practices which were fashionable in high society, and ended by telling, with details, a story about an english duchess - a story which he knew to be true. little chandler was astonished.'ah, well,' said ignatius gallaher, 'here we are in old jog-along dublin where nothing is known of such things.''how dull you must find it,' said little chandler, 'after all the other places you've seen!''well,' said ignatius gallaher, 'it's a relaxation to come over here, you know. and, after all, it's the old country, as they say, isn't it? you can't help having a certain feeling for it. that's human nature... but tell me something about yourself. hogan told me you had... tasted the joys of connubial bliss. two years ago, wasn't it?'little chandler blushed and smiled.'yes,' he said. 'i was married last may twelve months.''i hope it's not too late in the day to offer my best wishes,' said ignatius gallaher. 'i didn't know your address or i'd have done so at the time.'he extended his hand, which little chandler took.'well, tommy,' he said, 'i wish you and yours every joy in life, old chap, and tons of money, and may you never die till i shoot you. and that's the wish of a sincere friend, an old friend. you know that?''i know that,' said little chandler.'any youngsters?' said ignatius gallaher.little chandler blushed again.'we have one child,' he said.'son or daughter?''a little boy.'ignatius gallaher slapped his friend sonorously on the back.'bravo,' he said, 'i wouldn't doubt you, tommy.'little chandler smiled, looked confusedly at his glass and bit his lower lip with three childishly white front teeth.'i hope you'll spend an evening with us,' he said, 'before you go back. my wife will be delighted to meet you. we can have a little music and--''thanks awfully, old chap,' said ignatius gallaher, 'i'm sorry we didn't meet earlier. but i must leave tomorrow night.''tonight, perhaps... ?''i'm awfully sorry, old man. you see i'm over here with another fellow, clever young chap he is too, and we arranged to go to a little card-party. only for that... ''o, in that case... ''but who knows?' said ignatius gallaher considerately. 'next year i may take a little skip over here now that i've broken the ice. it's only a pleasure deferred.''very well,' said little chandler, 'the next time you come we must have an evening together. that's agreed now, isn't it?''yes, that's agreed,' said ignatius gallaher. 'next year if i come, parole d'honneur.''and to clinch the bargain,' said little chandler, 'we'll just have one more now.'ignatius gallaher took out a large gold watch and looked at it.'is it to be the last?' he said. 'because, you know, i have an a.p.''o, yes, positively,' said little chandler.'very well, then,' said ignatius gallaher, 'let us have another one as a deoc an doirus - that's good vernacular for a small whisky, i believe.'little chandler ordered the drinks. the blush which had risen to his face a few moments before was establishing itself. a trifle made him blush at any time: and now he felt warm and excited. three small whiskies had gone to his head and gallaher's strong cigar had confused his mind, for he was a delicate and abstinent person. the adventure of meeting gallaher after eight years, of finding himself with gallaher in corless's surrounded by lights and noise, of listening to gallaher's stories and of sharing for a brief space gallaher's vagrant and triumphant life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive nature. he felt acutely the contrast between his own life and his friend's, and it seemed to him unjust. gallaher was his inferior in birth and education. he was sure that he could do something better than his friend had ever done, or could ever do, something higher than mere tawdry journalism if he only got the chance. what was it that stood in his way? his unfortunate timidity! he wished to vindicate himself in some way, to assert his manhood. he saw behind gallaher's refusal of his invitation. gallaher was only patronizing him by his friendliness just as he was patronizing ireland by his visit.the barman brought their drinks. little chandler pushed one glass towards his friend and took up the other boldly.'who knows?' he said, as they lifted their glasses. 'when you come next year i may have the pleasure of wishing long life and happiness to mr and mrs ignatius gallaher.'ignatius gallaher in the act of drinking closed one eye expressively over the rim of his glass. when he had drunk he smacked his lips decisively, set down his glass and said:'no blooming fear of that, my boy. i'm going to have my fling first and see a bit of life and the world before i put my head in the sack - if i ever do.''some day you will,' said little chandler calmly.ignatius gallaher turned his orange tie and slate-blue eyes full upon his friend.'you think so?' he said.'you'll put your head in the sack,' repeated little chandler stoutly, 'like everyone else if you can find the girl.'he had slightly emphasized his tone, and he was aware that he had betrayed himself; but, though the colour had heightened in his cheek, he did not flinch from his friends' gaze. ignatius gallaher watched him for a few moments and then said:'if ever it occurs, you may bet your bottom dollar there'll be no mooning and spooning about it. i mean to marry money. she'll have a good fat account at the bank or she won't do for me.'little chandler shook his head.'why, man alive,' said ignatius gallaher, vehemently, 'do you know what it is? i've only to say the word and tomorrow i can have the woman and the cash. you don't believe it? well, i know it. there are hundreds - what am i saying? - thousands of rich germans and jews, rotten with money, that'd only be too glad... you wait a while, my boy. see if i don't play my cards properly. when i go about a thing i mean business, i tell you. you just wait.'he tossed his glass to his mouth, finished his drink and laughed loudly. then he looked thoughtfully before him and said in a calmer tone:'but i'm in no hurry. they can wait. i don't fancy tying myself up to one woman, you know.'he imitated with his mouth the act of tasting and made a wry face.'must get a bit stale, i should think,' he said.--------------------------------------little chandler sat in the room off the hall, holding a child in his arms. to save money they kept no servant, but annie's young sister monica came for an hour or so in the morning and an hour or so in the evening to help. but monica had gone home long ago. it was a quarter to nine. little chandler had come home late for tea and, moreover, he had forgotten to bring annie home the parcel of coffee from bewley's. of course she was in a bad humour and gave him short answers. she said she would do without any tea, but when it came near he time at which the shop at the corner closed she decided to go out herself for a quarter of a pound of tea and two pounds of sugar. she put the sleeping child deftly in his arms and said:'here. don't waken him.'a little lamp with a white china shade stood upon the table and its light fell over a photograph which was enclosed in a frame of crumpled horn. it was annie's photograph. little chandler looked at it, pausing at the thin tight lips. she wore the pale blue summer blouse which he had brought her home as a present one saturday. it had cost him ten and elevenpence; but what an agony of nervousness it had cost him! how he had suffered that day, waiting at the shop door until the shop was empty, standing at the counter and trying to appear at his ease while the girl piled ladies' blouses before him, paying at the desk and forgetting to take up the odd penny of his change, being called back by the cashier, and finally, striving to hide his blushes as he left the shop by examining the parcel to see if it was securely tied. when he brought the blouse home annie kissed him and said it was very pretty and stylish; but when she heard the price she threw the blouse on the table and said it was a regular swindle to charge ten and elevenpence for it. at first she wanted to take it back, but when she tried it on she was delighted with it, especially with the make of the sleeves, and kissed him and said he was very good to think of her.hm!...he looked coldly into the eyes of the photograph and they answered coldly. certainly they were pretty and the face itself was pretty. but he found something mean in it. why was it so unconscious and ladylike? the composure of the eyes irritated him. they repelled him and defied him: there was no passion in them, no rapture. he thought of what gallaher had said about rich jewesses. those dark oriental eyes, he thought, how full they are of passion, of voluptuous longing!... why had he married the eyes in the photograph?he caught himself up at the question and glanced nervously round the room. he found something mean in the pretty furniture which he had bought for his house on the hire system. annie had chosen it herself and it reminded him of her. it too was prim and pretty. a dull resentment against his life awoke within him. could he not escape from his little house? was it too late for him to try to live bravely like gallaher? could he go to london? there was the furniture still to be paid for. if he could only write a book and get it published, that might open the way for him.a volume of byron's poems lay before him on the table. he opened it cautiously with his left hand lest he should waken the child and began to read the first poem in the book:hushed are the winds and still the evening gloom,  not e'en a zephyr wanders through the grove,  whilst i return to view my margaret's tomb  and scatter flowers on the dust i love.he paused. he felt the rhythm of the verse about him in the room. how melancholy it was! could he, too, write like that, express the melancholy of his soul in verse? there were so many things he wanted to describe: his sensation of a few hours before on grattan bridge, for example. if he could get back again into that mood...the child awoke and began to cry. he turned from the page and tried to hush it: but it would not be hushed. he began to rock it to and fro in his arms, but its wailing cry grew keener. he rocked it faster while his eyes began to read the second stanza:within this narrow cell reclines her clay,  that clay where once...it was useless. he couldn't read. he couldn't do anything. the wailing of the child pierced the drum of his ear. it was useless, useless! he was a prisoner for life. his arms trembled with anger and suddenly bending to the child's face he shouted:'stop!'the child stopped for an instant, had a spasm of fright and began to scream. he jumped up from his chair and walked hastily up and down the room with the child in his arms. it began to sob piteously, losing its breath for four or five seconds, and then bursting out anew. the thin walls of the room echoed the sound. he tried to soothe it, but it sobbed more convulsively. he looked at the contracted and quivering face of the child and began to be alarmed. he counted seven sobs without a break between them and caught the child to his breast in fright. if it died!...the door was burst open and a young woman ran in, panting.'what is it? what is it?' she cried.the child, hearing its mother's voice, broke out into a paroxysm of sobbing.'it's nothing, annie... it's nothing... he began to cry... 'she flung her parcels on the floor and snatched the child from him.'what have you done to him?' she cried, glaring into his face.little chandler sustained for one moment the gaze of her eyes and his heart closed together as he met the hatred in them. he began to stammer:'it's nothing... he... he... began to cry... i couldn't... i didn't do anything... what?'giving no heed to him she began to walk up and down the room, clasping the child tightly in her arms and murmuring:'my little man! my little mannie! was 'ou frightened, love?'... there now, love! there now!... lambabaun! mamma's little lamb of the world!... there now!'little chandler felt his cheeks suffused with shame and he stood back out of the lamplight. he listened while the paroxysm of the child's sobbing grew less and less; and tears of remorse started to his eyes.the elephant's child from just so storiesin the high and far-off times the elephant, o best beloved, had no trunk.  he had only a blackish, bulgy nose, as big as a boot, that he could wriggle about from side to side; but he couldn't pick up things with it.  but there was one elephant--a new elephant--an elephant's child--who was full of 'satiable curtiosity, and that means he asked ever so many questions.  and he lived in africa, and he filled all africa with his 'satiable curtiosities.  he asked his tall aunt, the ostrich, why her tail-feathers grew just so, and his tall aunt the ostrich spanked him with her hard, hard, claw.  he asked his tall uncle, the giraffe, what made his skin spotty, and his tall uncle, the giraffe, spanked him with his hard, hard hoof.  and still he was full of 'satiable curtiosity!  he asked his broad aunt, the hippopotamus, why her eyes were red, and his broad aunt, the hippopotamus, spanked him with her broad, broad hoof; and he asked his hairy uncle, the baboon, why melons tasted just so, and his hairy uncle, the baboon, spanked him with his hairy, hairy paw.  and still he was full of 'satiable curtiosity!  he asked questions about everything that he saw, or heard, or felt, or smelt, or touched, and all his uncles and his aunts spanked him.  and still he was full of 'satiable curtiosity!one fine morning in the middle of the precession of the equinoxes this 'satiable elephant's child asked a new fine question that he had never asked before.  he asked, "what does the crocodile have for dinner?"  then everybody said, "hush!" in a loud and dretful tone, and they spanked him immediately and directly, without stopping, for a long time.by and by, when that was finished, he came upon kolokolo bird sitting in the middle of a wait-a-bit thornbush, and he said, "my father has spanked me, and my mother has spanked me; all my aunts and uncles have spanked me for my 'satiable curtiosity; and still i want to know what the crocodile has for dinner!"the kolokolo bird said, with a mournful cry, "go to the banks of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river, all set about with fever-trees, and find out."that very next morning, when there was nothing left of the equinoxes, because the precession had preceded according to precedent, this 'satiable elephant's child took a hundred pounds of bananas the little short red kind, and a hundred pounds of sugar-cane the long purple kind, and seventeen melons the greeny-crackly kind, and said to all his dear families, "good-bye.  i am going to the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river, all set about with fever-trees, to find out what the crocodile has for dinner."  and they all spanked him once more for luck, though he asked them most politely to stop.then he went away, a little warm, but not at all astonished, eating melons, and throwing the rind about, because he could not pick it up.he went from graham's town to kimberley, and from kimberley to khama's country, and from khama's country he went east by north, eating melons all the time, till at last he came to the banks of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river, all set about with fever-trees, precisely as kolokolo bird had said.now you must know and understand, o best beloved, that till that very week, and day, and hour, and minute, this 'satiable elephant's child had never seen a crocodile, and did not know what one was like.  it was all his 'satiable curtiosity.the first thing that he found was a bi-coloured-python-rock-snake curled around a rock."'scuse me," said the elephant's child most politely, "but have you seen such a thing as a crocodile in these promiscuous parts?""have i seen a crocodile?" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake, in a voice of dretful scorn.  "what will you ask me next?""'scuse me," said the elephant's child, "but could you kindly tell me what he has for dinner?"then the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake uncoiled himself very quickly from the rock, and spanked the elephant's child with his scalesome, flailsome tail."that is odd," said the elephant's child, "because my father and mother, and my uncle and my aunt, not to mention my other aunt, the hippopotamus, and my other uncle, the baboon, have all spanked me for my 'satiable curtiosity--and i suppose this is the same thing."so he said good-bye very politely to the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake, and helped to coil him up on the rock again, and went on, a little warm, but not at all astonished, eating melons, and throwing the rind about, because he could not pick it up, till he trod on what he thought was a log of wood at the very edge of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river, all set about with fever-trees.but it was really the crocodile, o best beloved, and the crocodile winked one eye--like this!"'scuse me," said the elephant's child most politely, "but do you happen to have seen a crocodile in these promiscuous parts?"then the crocodile winked the other eye, and lifted half his tail out of the mud; and the elephant's child stepped back most politely, because he did not wish to be spanked again."come hither, little one," said the crocodile.  "why do you ask such things?""'scuse me," said the elephant's child most politely, "but my father has spanked me, my mother has spanked me, not to mention my tall aunt, the ostrich, and my tall uncle, the giraffe, who can kick ever so hard, as well as my broad aunt, the hippopotamus, and my hairy uncle, the baboon, and including the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake, with the scalesome, flailsome tail, just up the bank, who spanks harder than any of them; and so, if it's quite all the same to you, i don't want to be spanked any more.""come hither, little one," said the crocodile, "for i am the crocodile," and he wept crocodile tears to show it was quite true.then the elephants' child grew all breathless, and panted, and kneeled down on the bank and said, "you are the very person i have been  looking for all these long days.  will you please tell me what you have for dinner?""come hither, little one," said the crocodile, "and i'll whisper."then the elephant's child put his head down close to the crocodile's musky, tusky mouth, and the crocodile caught him by his little nose, which up to that very week, day, hour, and minute, had been no bigger than a boot, though much more useful."i think," said the crocodile--and he said it between his teeth, like this--"i think to-day i will begin with elephant's child!"at this, o best beloved, the elephant's child was much annoyed, and he said, speaking through his nose, like this, "led go! you are hurtig be!"then the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake scuffled down from the bank and said, "my young friend, if you do not now, immediately and instantly, pull as hard as ever you can, it is my opinion that your acquaintance in the large-pattern leather ulster" and by this he meant the crocodile "will jerk you into yonder limpid stream before you can say jack robinson."this is the way bi-coloured-python-rock-snake always talked.then the elephant's child sat back on his little haunches, and pulled, and pulled, and pulled, and his nose began to stretch.  and the crocodile floundered into the water, making it all creamy with great sweeps of his tail, and he pulled, and pulled, and pulled.and the elephant's child's nose kept on stretching; and the elephant's child spread all his little four legs and pulled, and pulled, and pulled, and his nose kept on stretching; and the crocodile threshed his tail like an oar, and he pulled, and pulled, and pulled, and at each pull the elephant's child's nose grew longer and longer--and it hurt him hijjus!!then the elephant's child felt his legs slipping, and he said through his nose, which was now nearly five feet long, "this is to butch for be!"then the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake came down from the bank, and knotted himself in a double-clove-hitch round the elephant's child's hind legs, and said, "rash and inexperienced traveller, we will now seriously devote ourselves to a little high tension, because if we do not, it is my impression that yonder self-propelling man-of-war with the armour-plated upper deck" and by this, o best beloved, he meant the crocodile "will permanently vitiate your future career."that is the way all bi-coloured-python-rock-snakes always talk.so he pulled, and the elephant's child pulled, and the crocodile pulled, but the elephant's child and the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake pulled hardest; and at last the crocodile let go of the elephant's child's nose with a plop that you could hear all up and down the limpopo.then the elephant's child sat down most hard and sudden; but first he was careful to say "thank you" to the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake; and next he was kind to his poor pulled nose, and wrapped it all up in cool banana leaves, and hung it in the great grey-green greasy limpopo to cool."what are you doing that for?" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake."'scuse me," said the elephant's child, "but my nose is badly out of shape, and i am waiting for it to shrink.""then you will have to wait a long time," said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake.  "some people do not know what is good for them."the elephant's child sat there for three days waiting for his nose to shrink.  but it never grew any shorter, and, besides, it made him squint.  for, o best beloved, you will understand that the crocodile had pulled it out into a really truly trunk, same as all elephant's have today.at the end of the third day a fly came and stung him on the shoulder, and before he knew what he was doing he lifted up his trunk and hit that fly dead with the end of it."'vantage number one!" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake.  "you couldn't have done that with a mere-smear nose.  try and eat a little now."before he thought what he was doing the elephant's child put out his trunk and plucked a large bundle of grass, dusted it clean against his forelegs, and stuffed it into his mouth."'vantage number two!" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake.  "you couldn't have done that with a mere-smear nose.  don't you think the sun is very hot here?""it is," said the elephant's child, and before he thought what he was doing he schlooped up a schloop of mud from the banks of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo, and slapped it on his head, where it made a cool schloopy-sloshy mud-cap all trickly behind his ears."'vantage number three!" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake.  "you couldn't have done that with a mere-smear nose.  now how do you feel about being spanked again?""'scuse me," said the elephant's child, "but i should not like it at all.""how would you like to spank somebody?" said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake."i should like it very much indeed," said the elephant's child."well," said the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake, "you will find that new nose of yours very useful to spank people with.""thank you," said the elephant's child, "i'll remember that; and now i think i'll go home to all my dear families and try."so the elephant's child went home across africa frisking and whisking his trunk.  when he wanted fruit to eat he pulled fruit down from a tree, instead of waiting for it to fall as he used to do.  when he wanted grass he plucked grass up from the ground, instead of going on his knees as he used to do.  when the flies bit him he broke off the branch of a tree and used it as a fly-whisk; and he made himself a new, cool slushy-squshy mud-cap whenever the sun was hot.  when he felt lonely walking through africa he sang to himself down his trunk, and the noise was louder than several brass bands.  he went especially out of his way to find a broad hippopotamus she was no relation of his, and he spanked her very hard, to make sure that the bi-coloured-python-rock-snake had spoken the truth about his new trunk.  the rest of the time he picked up the melon rinds that he had dropped on his way to the limpopo--for he was a tidy pachyderm.one dark evening he came back to all his dear families, and he coiled up his trunk and said, "how do you do?"  they were very glad to see him, and immediately said, "come here and be spanked for your 'satiable curtiosity.""pooh," said the elephant's child.  "i don't think you people's know anything about spanking; but i do, and i'll show you."then he uncurled his trunk and knocked two of his dear brothers head over heels."o bananas!" said they, "where did you learn that trick, and what have you done to your nose?""i got a new one from the crocodile on the banks of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river," said the elephant's child.  "i asked him what he had for dinner, and he gave me this to keep.""it looks very ugly," said his hairy uncle, the baboon."it does," said the elephant's child. "but it's very useful," and he picked up his hairy uncle, the baboon, by one hairy leg, and hove him into a hornets' nest.then that bad elephant's child spanked all his dear families for a long time, till they were very warm and greatly astonished.  he pulled out his tall ostrich aunt's tail-feathers; and he caught his tall uncle, the giraffe, by the hind-leg, and dragged him through a thorn-bush; and he shouted at his broad aunt, the hippopotamus, and blew bubbles into her ear when she was sleeping in the water after meals; but he never let any one touch the kolokolo bird.at last things grew so exciting that his dear families went off one by one in a hurry to the banks of the great grey-green, greasy limpopo river, all set about with fever-trees, to borrow new noses from the crocodile.  when they came back nobody spanked anybody any more; and ever since that day, o best beloved, all the elephants you will ever see besides all those that you won't, have trunks precisely like the trunk of the 'satiable elephant's child.in the days when everybody started fair, best beloved, the leopard lived in a place called the high veldt. 'member it wasn't the low veldt, or the bush veldt, or the sour veldt, but the 'sclusively bare, hot, shiny high veldt, where there was sand and sandy-coloured rock and 'sclusively tufts of sandy-yellowish grass. the giraffe and the zebra and the eland and the koodoo and the hartebeest lived there; and they were 'sclusively sandy-yellow-brownish all over; but the leopard, he was the 'sclusivist sandiest-yellowish-brownest of them all a greyish-yellowish catty-shaped kind of beast, and he matched the veldt to one hair. this was very bad for the giraffe and the zebra and the rest of them; for he would lie down by a 'sclusively yellowish-greyish-brownish stone or clump of grass, and when the giraffe or the zebra or the eland or the koodoo or the bush-buck or the bonte-buck came by he would surprise them out of their jumpsome lives. he would indeed! and, also, there was an ethiopian with bows and arrows (a 'sclusively greyish-brownish-yellowish man he was then), who lived on the high veldt with the leopard; and the two used to hunt together the ethiopian with his bows and arrows, and the leopard 'sclusively with his teeth and claws till the giraffe and the eland and the koodoo and the quagga and all the rest of them didn't know which way to jump, best beloved. they didn't indeed!after a long time things lived for ever so long in those days they learned to avoid anything that looked like a leopard or an ethiopian; and bit by bit the giraffe began it, because his legs were the longest they went away from the high veldt. they scuttled for days and days till they came to a great forest, 'sclusively full of trees and bushes and stripy, speckly, patchy-blatchy shadows, and there they hid: and after another long time, what with standing half in the shade and half out of it, and what with the slippery-slidy shadows of the trees falling on them, the giraffe grew blotchy, and the zebra grew stripy, and the eland and the koodoo grew darker, with little wavy grey lines on their backs like bark on a tree trunk; and so, though you could hear them and smell them, you could very seldom see them, and then only when you knew precisely where to look. they had a beautiful time in the 'sclusively speckly-spickly shadows of the forest, while the leopard and the ethiopian ran about over the 'sclusively greyish-yellowish-reddish high veldt outside, wondering where all their breakfasts and their dinners and their teas had gone. at last they were so hungry that they ate rats and beetles and rock-rabbits, the leopard and the ethipian, and then they met baviaan the dog-headed, barking baboon, who is quite the wisest animal in all south africa.said leopard to baviaan (and it was a very hot day), "where has all the game gone?"and baviaan winked. he knew.said the ethiopian to baviaan, "can you tell me the present habitat of the aboriginal fauna?" (that meant just the same thing, but the ethiopian always used long words. he was a grown-up.)and baviaan winked. he knew.then said baviaan, "the game has gone into other spots; and my advice to you, leopard, is to go into other spots as soon as you can."and the ethiopian said, "that is all very fine, but i wish to know whither the aboriginal fauna has migrated."then said baviaan, "the aboriginal fauna has joined the aboriginal flora because it was high time for a change; and my advice to you, ethiopian, is to change as soon as you can."that puzzled the leopard and the ethiopian, but they set off to look for the aboriginal flora, and presently, after ever so many days, they saw a great, high, tall forest full of tree trunks all 'sclusively speckled and sprottled and spottled, dotted and splashed and slashed and hatched and cross-hatched with shadows. (say that quickly aloud, and you will see how very shadowy the forest must have been.)"what is this," said the leopard, "that is so 'sclusively dark, and yet so full of little pieces of light?""i don't know," said the ethiopian, "but it ought to be the aboriginal flora. i can smell giraffe, and i can hear giraffe, but i can't see giraffe.""that's curious," said leopard. "i suppose it is because we have just come in out of the sunshine. i can smell zebra, and i can hear zebra, but i can't see zebra.""wait a bit," said the ethiopian. "it's a long time since we've hunted 'em. perhaps we've forgotten what they were like.""fiddle!" said the leopard. "i remember them perfectly on the high veldt, especially their marrow bones. giraffe is about seventeen feet high, of a 'sclusively fulvous golden-yellow from head to heel; and zebra is about four and a half feet high, of a 'sclusively grey-fawn colour from head to heel.""ummm," said the ethiopian, looking into the speckly-spickly shadows of the aboriginal flora-forest. "then they ought to show up in this dark place like ripe bananas in a smokehouse."but they didn't. the leopard and the ethiopian hunted all day; and though they could smell them and hear them, they never saw one of them.for goodness sake," said the leopard at tea-time, "let us wait till it gets dark. this daylight hunting is a perfect scandal."so they waited till dark, and then the leopard heard something breathing sniffily in the starlight that fell all stripy through the branches, and he jumped at the noise, and it smelt like zebra, and it felt like zebra, and when he knocked it down it kicked like zebra, but he couldn't see it. so he said, "be quiet, o you person without any form. i am going to sit on your head till morning, because there is something about you that i don't understand."presently he heard a grunt and a crash and a scramble, and the ethiopian called out, "i've caught a thing that i can't see. it smells like giraffe, and it kicks like giraffe, but it hasn't any form.""don't you trust it," said the leopard. "sit on its head till the morning same as me. they haven't any form any of 'em."so they sat down on them hard till bright morning-time, and then leopard said, "what have you at your end of the table, brother?"the ethiopian scratched his head and said, "it ought to be 'sclusively a rich fulvous orange-tawny from head to heel, and it ought to be giraffe; but it is covered all over with chesnut blotches. what have you at your end of the table, brother?"and the leopard scratched his head and said, "it ought to be 'sclusively a delicate greyish-fawn, and it ought to be zebra; but it is covered all over with black and purple stripes. what in the world have you been doing to yourself, zebra? don't you know that if you were on the high veldt i could see you ten miles off? you haven't any form.""yes," said the zebra, "but this isn't the high veldt. can't you see?""i can now," said the leopard. "but i couldn't all yesterday. how is it done?""let us up," said the zebra, "and we will show you."they let the zebra and the giraffe get up; and zebra moved away to some little thorn-bushes where the sunlight fell all stripy, and giraffe moved off to some tallish trees where the shadows fell all blotchy."now watch," said the zebra and the giraffe. "this is the way it's done. one two three! and where's your breakfast?"leopard stared, and ethiopian stared, but all they could see were stripy shadows and blotched shadows in the forest, but never a sign of zebra and giraffe. they had just walked off and hidden themselves in the shadowy forest."hi! hi!" said the ethiopian. "that's a trick worth learning. take a lesson by it, leopard. you show up in this dark place like a bar of soap in a coal-scuttle.""ho! ho!" said the leopard. "would it surprise you very much to know that you show up in this dark place like a mustard-plaster on a sack of coals?""well, calling names won't catch dinner," said the ethiopian. "the long and the little of it is that we don't match our backgrounds. i'm going to take baviaan's advice. he told me i ought to change; and as i've nothing to change except my skin i'm going to change that.""what to?" said the leopard, tremendously excited."to a nice working blackish-brownish colour, with a little purple in it, and touches of slaty-blue. it will be the very thing for hiding in hollows and behind trees."so he changed his skin then and there, and the leopard was more excited than ever; he had never seen a man change his skin before."but what about me?" he said, when the ethiopian had worked his last little finger into his fine new black skin."you take baviaan's advice too. he told you to go into spots.""so i did," said the leopard. "i went into other spots as fast as i could. i went into this spot with you, and a lot of good it has done me.""oh," said the ethiopian, "baviaan didn't mean spots in south africa. he meant spots on your skin.""what's the use of that?" said the leopard."think of giraffe," said the ethiopian, "or if you prefer stripes, think of zebra. they find their spots and stripes give them perfect satisfaction.""umm," said the leopard. "i wouldn't look like zebra not for ever so.""well, make up your mind," said the ethiopian, "because i'd hate to go hunting without you, but i must if you insist on looking like a sun-flower against a tarred fence.""i'll take spots, then," said the leopard; "but don't make 'em too vulgar-big. i wouldn't look like giraffe not for ever so."i'll make 'em with the tips of my fingers," said the ethiopian. "there's plenty of black left on my skin still. stand over!"then the ethiopian put his five fingers close together (there was plenty of black left on his new skin still) and pressed them all over the leopard, and wherever the five fingers touched they left five little black marks, all close together. you can see them on any leopard's skin you like, best beloved. sometimes the fingers slipped and the marks got a little blurred; but if you look closely at any leopard now you will see that there are always five spots off five fat black finger-tips."now you are a beauty!" said the ethiopian. "you can lie out on the bare ground and look like a heap of pebbles. you can lie out on the naked rocks and look like a piece of pudding-stone. you can lie out on a leafy branch and look like sunshine sifting through the leaves; and you can lie right across the centre of a path and look like nothing in particular. think of that and purr!""but if i'm all this," said the leopard, "why didn't you go spotty too?""oh, plain black's best," said the ethiopian. "now come along and we'll see if we can't get even with mr. one-two-three-where's-your-breakfast!"so they went away and lived happily ever afterward, best beloved. that is all.oh, now and then you will hear grown-ups say, "can the ethiopian change his skin or the leopard his spots?" i don't think even grown-ups would keep on saying such a silly thing if the leopard and the ethiopian hadn't done it once do you? but they will never do it again, best beloved. they are quite contented as they are."rikki-tikki-tavi"  at the hole where he went in  red-eye called to wrinkle-skin.  hear what little red-eye saith:  "nag, come up and dance with death!"  eye to eye and head to head,  (keep the measure, nag.)  this shall end when one is dead;  (at thy pleasure, nag.)  turn for turn and twist for twist--  (run and hide thee, nag.)  hah! the hooded death has missed!  (woe betide thee, nag!)this is the story of the great war that rikki-tikki-tavi fought single-handed, through  the bath-rooms of the big bungalow in segowlee cantonment. darzee, the tailorbird,  helped him, and chuchundra, the musk-rat, who never comes out into the middle of the  floor, but always creeps round by the wall, gave him advice, but rikki-tikki did the  real fighting. he was a mongoose, rather like a little cat in his fur and his tail, but  quite like a weasel in his head and his habits. his eyes and the end of his restless nose  were pink. he could scratch himself anywhere he pleased with any leg, front or back,  that he chose to use. he could fluff up his tail till it looked like a bottle brush, and his  war cry as he scuttled through the long grass was: "rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!" one  day, a high summer flood washed him out of the burrow where he lived with his father and  mother, and carried him, kicking and clucking, down a roadside ditch. he found a little  wisp of grass floating there, and clung to it till he lost his senses. when he revived, he  was lying in the hot sun on the middle of a garden path, very draggled indeed, and a small  boy was saying, "here's a dead mongoose. let's have a funeral." "no," said his mother,  "let's take him in and dry him. perhaps he isn't really dead." they took him into the  house, and a big man picked him up between his finger and thumb and said he was not dead but  half choked. so they wrapped him in cotton wool, and warmed him over a little fire, and he  opened his eyes and sneezed. "now," said the big man (he was an englishman who had just  moved into the bungalow), "don't frighten him, and we'll see what he'll do." it is the  hardest thing in the world to frighten a mongoose, because he is eaten up from nose to  tail with curiosity. the motto of all the mongoose family is "run and find out," and  rikki-tikki was a true mongoose. he looked at the cotton wool, decided that it was not  good to eat, ran all round the table, sat up and put his fur in order, scratched himself,  and jumped on the small boy's shoulder. "don't be frightened, teddy," said his father."that's his way of making friends." "ouch! he's tickling under my chin," said teddy.rikki-tikki looked down between the boy's collar and neck, snuffed at his ear, and  climbed down to the floor, where he sat rubbing his nose. "good gracious," said teddy's  mother, "and that's a wild creature! i suppose he's so tame because we've been kind to  him." "all mongooses are like that," said her husband. "if teddy doesn't pick him up by  the tail, or try to put him in a cage, he'll run in and out of the house all day long. let's  give him something to eat." they gave him a little piece of raw meat. rikki-tikki liked  it immensely, and when it was finished he went out into the veranda and sat in the  sunshine and fluffed up his fur to make it dry to the roots. then he felt better. "there  are more things to find out about in this house," he said to himself, "than all my family  could find out in all their lives. i shall certainly stay and find out." he spent all  that day roaming over the house. he nearly drowned himself in the bath-tubs, put his  nose into the ink on a writing table, and burned it on the end of the big man's cigar, for he  climbed up in the big man's lap to see how writing was done. at nightfall he ran into  teddy's nursery to watch how kerosene lamps were lighted, and when teddy went to bed  rikki-tikki climbed up too. but he was a restless companion, because he had to get up and  attend to every noise all through the night, and find out what made it. teddy's mother  and father came in, the last thing, to look at their boy, and rikki-tikki was awake on the  pillow. "i don't like that," said teddy's mother. "he may bite the child." "he'll do no  such thing," said the father. "teddy's safer with that little beast than if he had a  bloodhound to watch him. if a snake came into the nursery now--" but teddy's mother  wouldn't think of anything so awful. early in the morning rikki-tikki came to early  breakfast in the veranda riding on teddy's shoulder, and they gave him banana and some  boiled egg. he sat on all their laps one after the other, because every well-brought-up  mongoose always hopes to be a house mongoose some day and have rooms to run about in; and  rikki-tikki's mother (she used to live in the general's house at segowlee) had  carefully told rikki what to do if ever he came across white men. then rikki-tikki went  out into the garden to see what was to be seen. it was a large garden, only half  cultivated, with bushes, as big as summer-houses, of marshal niel roses, lime and  orange trees, clumps of bamboos, and thickets of high grass. rikki-tikki licked his  lips. "this is a splendid hunting-ground," he said, and his tail grew bottle-brushy at  the thought of it, and he scuttled up and down the garden, snuffing here and there till he  heard very sorrowful voices in a thorn-bush. it was darzee, the tailorbird, and his  wife. they had made a beautiful nest by pulling two big leaves together and stitching  them up the edges with fibers, and had filled the hollow with cotton and downy fluff. the  nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and cried. "what is the matter?" asked  rikki-tikki. "we are very miserable," said darzee. "one of our babies fell out of the  nest yesterday and nag ate him." "h'm!" said rikki-tikki, "that is very sad--but i am a  stranger here. who is nag?" darzee and his wife only cowered down in the nest without  answering, for from the thick grass at the foot of the bush there came a low hiss--a  horrid cold sound that made rikki-tikki jump back two clear feet. then inch by inch out  of the grass rose up the head and spread hood of nag, the big black cobra, and he was five  feet long from tongue to tail. when he had lifted one-third of himself clear of the  ground, he stayed balancing to and fro exactly as a dandelion tuft balances in the wind,  and he looked at rikki-tikki with the wicked snake's eyes that never change their  expression, whatever the snake may be thinking of. "who is nag?" said he. "i am nag. the  great god brahm put his mark upon all our people, when the first cobra spread his hood to  keep the sun off brahm as he slept. look, and be afraid!" he spread out his hood more than  ever, and rikki-tikki saw the spectacle-mark on the back of it that looks exactly like  the eye part of a hook-and-eye fastening. he was afraid for the minute, but it is  impossible for a mongoose to stay frightened for any length of time, and though  rikki-tikki had never met a live cobra before, his mother had fed him on dead ones, and he  knew that all a grown mongoose's business in life was to fight and eat snakes. nag knew  that too and, at the bottom of his cold heart, he was afraid. "well," said rikki-tikki,  and his tail began to fluff up again, "marks or no marks, do you think it is right for you to  eat fledglings out of a nest?" nag was thinking to himself, and watching the least  little movement in the grass behind rikki-tikki. he knew that mongooses in the garden  meant death sooner or later for him and his family, but he wanted to get rikki-tikki off  his guard. so he dropped his head a little, and put it on one side. "let us talk," he said."you eat eggs. why should not i eat birds?" "behind you! look behind you!" sang darzee.rikki-tikki knew better than to waste time in staring. he jumped up in the air as high as  he could go, and just under him whizzed by the head of nagaina, nag's wicked wife. she had  crept up behind him as he was talking, to make an end of him. he heard her savage hiss as the  stroke missed. he came down almost across her back, and if he had been an old mongoose he  would have known that then was the time to break her back with one bite; but he was afraid  of the terrible lashing return stroke of the cobra. he bit, indeed, but did not bite long  enough, and he jumped clear of the whisking tail, leaving nagaina torn and angry."wicked, wicked darzee!" said nag, lashing up as high as he could reach toward the nest  in the thorn-bush. but darzee had built it out of reach of snakes, and it only swayed to  and fro. rikki-tikki felt his eyes growing red and hot (when a mongoose's eyes grow red,  he is angry), and he sat back on his tail and hind legs like a little kangaroo, and looked  all round him, and chattered with rage. but nag and nagaina had disappeared into the  grass. when a snake misses its stroke, it never says anything or gives any sign of what it  means to do next. rikki-tikki did not care to follow them, for he did not feel sure that he  could manage two snakes at once. so he trotted off to the gravel path near the house, and  sat down to think. it was a serious matter for him. if you read the old books of natural  history, you will find they say that when the mongoose fights the snake and happens to  get bitten, he runs off and eats some herb that cures him. that is not true. the victory is  only a matter of quickness of eye and quickness of foot--snake's blow against  mongoose's jump--and as no eye can follow the motion of a snake's head when it strikes,  this makes things much more wonderful than any magic herb. rikki-tikki knew he was a  young mongoose, and it made him all the more pleased to think that he had managed to  escape a blow from behind. it gave him confidence in himself, and when teddy came  running down the path, rikki-tikki was ready to be petted. but just as teddy was  stooping, something wriggled a little in the dust, and a tiny voice said: "be careful. i  am death!" it was karait, the dusty brown snakeling that lies for choice on the dusty  earth; and his bite is as dangerous as the cobra's. but he is so small that nobody thinks  of him, and so he does the more harm to people. rikki-tikki's eyes grew red again, and he  danced up to karait with the peculiar rocking, swaying motion that he had inherited  from his family. it looks very funny, but it is so perfectly balanced a gait that you can  fly off from it at any angle you please, and in dealing with snakes this is an advantage.if rikki-tikki had only known, he was doing a much more dangerous thing than fighting  nag, for karait is so small, and can turn so quickly, that unless rikki bit him close to  the back of the head, he would get the return stroke in his eye or his lip. but rikki did not  know. his eyes were all red, and he rocked back and forth, looking for a good place to  hold. karait struck out. rikki jumped sideways and tried to run in, but the wicked  little dusty gray head lashed within a fraction of his shoulder, and he had to jump over  the body, and the head followed his heels close. teddy shouted to the house: "oh, look  here! our mongoose is killing a snake." and rikki-tikki heard a scream from teddy's  mother. his father ran out with a stick, but by the time he came up, karait had lunged out  once too far, and rikki-tikki had sprung, jumped on the snake's back, dropped his head  far between his forelegs, bitten as high up the back as he could get hold, and rolled  away. that bite paralyzed karait, and rikki-tikki was just going to eat him up from the  tail, after the custom of his family at dinner, when he remembered that a full meal makes  a slow mongoose, and if he wanted all his strength and quickness ready, he must keep  himself thin. he went away for a dust bath under the castor-oil bushes, while teddy's  father beat the dead karait. "what is the use of that?" thought rikki-tikki. "i have  settled it all;" and then teddy's mother picked him up from the dust and hugged him,  crying that he had saved teddy from death, and teddy's father said that he was a  providence, and teddy looked on with big scared eyes. rikki-tikki was rather amused at  all the fuss, which, of course, he did not understand. teddy's mother might just as well  have petted teddy for playing in the dust. rikki was thoroughly enjoying himself. that  night at dinner, walking to and fro among the wine-glasses on the table, he might have  stuffed himself three times over with nice things. but he remembered nag and nagaina,  and though it was very pleasant to be patted and petted by teddy's mother, and to sit on  teddy's shoulder, his eyes would get red from time to time, and he would go off into his  long war cry of "rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!" teddy carried him off to bed, and  insisted on rikki-tikki sleeping under his chin. rikki-tikki was too well bred to bite  or scratch, but as soon as teddy was asleep he went off for his nightly walk round the  house, and in the dark he ran up against chuchundra, the musk-rat, creeping around by  the wall. chuchundra is a broken-hearted little beast. he whimpers and cheeps all the  night, trying to make up his mind to run into the middle of the room. but he never gets  there. "don't kill me," said chuchundra, almost weeping. "rikki-tikki, don't kill  me!" "do you think a snake-killer kills muskrats?" said rikki-tikki scornfully."those who kill snakes get killed by snakes," said chuchundra, more sorrowfully than  ever. "and how am i to be sure that nag won't mistake me for you some dark night?" "there's  not the least danger," said rikki-tikki. "but nag is in the garden, and i know you don't  go there." "my cousin chua, the rat, told me--" said chuchundra, and then he stopped."told you what?" "h'sh! nag is everywhere, rikki-tikki. you should have talked to chua  in the garden." "i didn't--so you must tell me. quick, chuchundra, or i'll bite you!"chuchundra sat down and cried till the tears rolled off his whiskers. "i am a very poor  man," he sobbed. "i never had spirit enough to run out into the middle of the room. h'sh! i  mustn't tell you anything. can't you hear, rikki-tikki?" rikki-tikki listened. the  house was as still as still, but he thought he could just catch the faintest  scratch-scratch in the world--a noise as faint as that of a wasp walking on a  window-pane--the dry scratch of a snake's scales on brick-work. "that's nag or  nagaina," he said to himself, "and he is crawling into the bath-room sluice. you're  right, chuchundra; i should have talked to chua." he stole off to teddy's bath-room,  but there was nothing there, and then to teddy's mother's bathroom. at the bottom of the  smooth plaster wall there was a brick pulled out to make a sluice for the bath water, and  as rikki-tikki stole in by the masonry curb where the bath is put, he heard nag and  nagaina whispering together outside in the moonlight. "when the house is emptied of  people," said nagaina to her husband, "he will have to go away, and then the garden will  be our own again. go in quietly, and remember that the big man who killed karait is the  first one to bite. then come out and tell me, and we will hunt for rikki-tikki together.""but are you sure that there is anything to be gained by killing the people?" said nag."everything. when there were no people in the bungalow, did we have any mongoose in the  garden? so long as the bungalow is empty, we are king and queen of the garden; and  remember that as soon as our eggs in the melon bed hatch (as they may tomorrow), our  children will need room and quiet." "i had not thought of that," said nag. "i will go, but  there is no need that we should hunt for rikki-tikki afterward. i will kill the big man  and his wife, and the child if i can, and come away quietly. then the bungalow will be  empty, and rikki-tikki will go." rikki-tikki tingled all over with rage and hatred at  this, and then nag's head came through the sluice, and his five feet of cold body  followed it. angry as he was, rikki-tikki was very frightened as he saw the size of the  big cobra. nag coiled himself up, raised his head, and looked into the bathroom in the  dark, and rikki could see his eyes glitter. "now, if i kill him here, nagaina will know;  and if i fight him on the open floor, the odds are in his favor. what am i to do?" said  rikki-tikki-tavi. nag waved to and fro, and then rikki-tikki heard him drinking from  the biggest water-jar that was used to fill the bath. "that is good," said the snake."now, when karait was killed, the big man had a stick. he may have that stick still, but  when he comes in to bathe in the morning he will not have a stick. i shall wait here till he  comes. nagaina--do you hear me?--i shall wait here in the cool till daytime." there  was no answer from outside, so rikki-tikki knew nagaina had gone away. nag coiled  himself down, coil by coil, round the bulge at the bottom of the water jar, and  rikki-tikki stayed still as death. after an hour he began to move, muscle by muscle,  toward the jar. nag was asleep, and rikki-tikki looked at his big back, wondering which  would be the best place for a good hold. "if i don't break his back at the first jump," said  rikki, "he can still fight. and if he fights--o rikki!" he looked at the thickness of the  neck below the hood, but that was too much for him; and a bite near the tail would only make  nag savage. "it must be the head"' he said at last; "the head above the hood. and, when i am  once there, i must not let go." then he jumped. the head was lying a little clear of the  water jar, under the curve of it; and, as his teeth met, rikki braced his back against the  bulge of the red earthenware to hold down the head. this gave him just one second's  purchase, and he made the most of it. then he was battered to and fro as a rat is shaken by a  dog--to and fro on the floor, up and down, and around in great circles, but his eyes were  red and he held on as the body cart-whipped over the floor, upsetting the tin dipper and  the soap dish and the flesh brush, and banged against the tin side of the bath. as he held  he closed his jaws tighter and tighter, for he made sure he would be banged to death, and,  for the honor of his family, he preferred to be found with his teeth locked. he was dizzy,  aching, and felt shaken to pieces when something went off like a thunderclap just  behind him. a hot wind knocked him senseless and red fire singed his fur. the big man had  been wakened by the noise, and had fired both barrels of a shotgun into nag just behind  the hood. rikki-tikki held on with his eyes shut, for now he was quite sure he was dead.but the head did not move, and the big man picked him up and said, "it's the mongoose  again, alice. the little chap has saved our lives now." then teddy's mother came in with  a very white face, and saw what was left of nag, and rikki-tikki dragged himself to  teddy's bedroom and spent half the rest of the night shaking himself tenderly to find  out whether he really was broken into forty pieces, as he fancied. when morning came he  was very stiff, but well pleased with his doings. "now i have nagaina to settle with, and  she will be worse than five nags, and there's no knowing when the eggs she spoke of will  hatch. goodness! i must go and see darzee," he said. without waiting for breakfast,  rikki-tikki ran to the thornbush where darzee was singing a song of triumph at the top of  his voice. the news of nag's death was all over the garden, for the sweeper had thrown the  body on the rubbish-heap. "oh, you stupid tuft of feathers!" said rikki-tikki  angrily. "is this the time to sing?" "nag is dead--is dead--is dead!" sang darzee."the valiant rikki-tikki caught him by the head and held fast. the big man brought the  bang-stick, and nag fell in two pieces! he will never eat my babies again." "all that's  true enough. but where's nagaina?" said rikki-tikki, looking carefully round him."nagaina came to the bathroom sluice and called for nag," darzee went on, "and nag came  out on the end of a stick--the sweeper picked him up on the end of a stick and threw him upon  the rubbish heap. let us sing about the great, the red-eyed rikki-tikki!" and darzee  filled his throat and sang. "if i could get up to your nest, i'd roll your babies out!"said rikki-tikki. "you don't know when to do the right thing at the right time. you're  safe enough in your nest there, but it's war for me down here. stop singing a minute,  darzee." "for the great, the beautiful rikki-tikki's sake i will stop," said darzee."what is it, o killer of the terrible nag?" "where is nagaina, for the third time?" "on  the rubbish heap by the stables, mourning for nag. great is rikki-tikki with the white  teeth." "bother my white teeth! have you ever heard where she keeps her eggs?" "in the  melon bed, on the end nearest the wall, where the sun strikes nearly all day. she hid them  there weeks ago." "and you never thought it worth while to tell me? the end nearest the  wall, you said?" "rikki-tikki, you are not going to eat her eggs?" "not eat exactly;  no. darzee, if you have a grain of sense you will fly off to the stables and pretend that  your wing is broken, and let nagaina chase you away to this bush. i must get to the  melon-bed, and if i went there now she'd see me." darzee was a feather-brained little  fellow who could never hold more than one idea at a time in his head. and just because he  knew that nagaina's children were born in eggs like his own, he didn't think at first  that it was fair to kill them. but his wife was a sensible bird, and she knew that cobra's  eggs meant young cobras later on. so she flew off from the nest, and left darzee to keep  the babies warm, and continue his song about the death of nag. darzee was very like a man  in some ways. she fluttered in front of nagaina by the rubbish heap and cried out, "oh, my  wing is broken! the boy in the house threw a stone at me and broke it." then she fluttered  more desperately than ever. nagaina lifted up her head and hissed, "you warned  rikki-tikki when i would have killed him. indeed and truly, you've chosen a bad place to  be lame in." and she moved toward darzee's wife, slipping along over the dust. "the boy  broke it with a stone!" shrieked darzee's wife. "well! it may be some consolation to you  when you're dead to know that i shall settle accounts with the boy. my husband lies on the  rubbish heap this morning, but before night the boy in the house will lie very still.what is the use of running away? i am sure to catch you. little fool, look at me!" darzee's  wife knew better than to do that, for a bird who looks at a snake's eyes gets so frightened  that she cannot move. darzee's wife fluttered on, piping sorrowfully, and never  leaving the ground, and nagaina quickened her pace. rikki-tikki heard them going up  the path from the stables, and he raced for the end of the melon patch near the wall.there, in the warm litter above the melons, very cunningly hidden, he found  twenty-five eggs, about the size of a bantam's eggs, but with whitish skin instead of  shell. "i was not a day too soon," he said, for he could see the baby cobras curled up  inside the skin, and he knew that the minute they were hatched they could each kill a man  or a mongoose. he bit off the tops of the eggs as fast as he could, taking care to crush the  young cobras, and turned over the litter from time to time to see whether he had missed  any. at last there were only three eggs left, and rikki-tikki began to chuckle to  himself, when he heard darzee's wife screaming: "rikki-tikki, i led nagaina toward  the house, and she has gone into the veranda, and--oh, come quickly--she means  killing!" rikki-tikki smashed two eggs, and tumbled backward down the melon-bed with  the third egg in his mouth, and scuttled to the veranda as hard as he could put foot to the  ground. teddy and his mother and father were there at early breakfast, but rikki-tikki  saw that they were not eating anything. they sat stone-still, and their faces were  white. nagaina was coiled up on the matting by teddy's chair, within easy striking  distance of teddy's bare leg, and she was swaying to and fro, singing a song of triumph."son of the big man that killed nag," she hissed, "stay still. i am not ready yet. wait a  little. keep very still, all you three! if you move i strike, and if you do not move i  strike. oh, foolish people, who killed my nag!" teddy's eyes were fixed on his father,  and all his father could do was to whisper, "sit still, teddy. you mustn't move. teddy,  keep still." then rikki-tikki came up and cried, "turn round, nagaina. turn and  fight!" "all in good time," said she, without moving her eyes. "i will settle my account  with you presently. look at your friends, rikki-tikki. they are still and white. they  are afraid. they dare not move, and if you come a step nearer i strike." "look at your  eggs," said rikki-tikki, "in the melon bed near the wall. go and look, nagaina!" the  big snake turned half around, and saw the egg on the veranda. "ah-h! give it to me," she  said. rikki-tikki put his paws one on each side of the egg, and his eyes were blood-red."what price for a snake's egg? for a young cobra? for a young king cobra? for the  last--the very last of the brood? the ants are eating all the others down by the melon  bed." nagaina spun clear round, forgetting everything for the sake of the one egg.rikki-tikki saw teddy's father shoot out a big hand, catch teddy by the shoulder, and  drag him across the little table with the tea-cups, safe and out of reach of nagaina."tricked! tricked! tricked! rikk-tck-tck!" chuckled rikki-tikki. "the boy is safe,  and it was i--i--i that caught nag by the hood last night in the bathroom." then he began  to jump up and down, all four feet together, his head close to the floor. "he threw me to  and fro, but he could not shake me off. he was dead before the big man blew him in two. i did  it! rikki-tikki-tck-tck! come then, nagaina. come and fight with me. you shall not be a  widow long." nagaina saw that she had lost her chance of killing teddy, and the egg lay  between rikki-tikki's paws. "give me the egg, rikki-tikki. give me the last of my eggs,  and i will go away and never come back," she said, lowering her hood. "yes, you will go  away, and you will never come back. for you will go to the rubbish heap with nag. fight,  widow! the big man has gone for his gun! fight!" rikki-tikki was bounding all round  nagaina, keeping just out of reach of her stroke, his little eyes like hot coals.nagaina gathered herself together and flung out at him. rikki-tikki jumped up and  backward. again and again and again she struck, and each time her head came with a whack  on the matting of the veranda and she gathered herself together like a watch spring.then rikki-tikki danced in a circle to get behind her, and nagaina spun round to keep her  head to his head, so that the rustle of her tail on the matting sounded like dry leaves  blown along by the wind. he had forgotten the egg. it still lay on the veranda, and  nagaina came nearer and nearer to it, till at last, while rikki-tikki was drawing  breath, she caught it in her mouth, turned to the veranda steps, and flew like an arrow  down the path, with rikki-tikki behind her. when the cobra runs for her life, she goes  like a whip-lash flicked across a horse's neck. rikki-tikki knew that he must catch  her, or all the trouble would begin again. she headed straight for the long grass by the  thorn-bush, and as he was running rikki-tikki heard darzee still singing his foolish  little song of triumph. but darzee's wife was wiser. she flew off her nest as nagaina  came along, and flapped her wings about nagaina's head. if darzee had helped they might  have turned her, but nagaina only lowered her hood and went on. still, the instant's  delay brought rikki-tikki up to her, and as she plunged into the rat-hole where she and  nag used to live, his little white teeth were clenched on her tail, and he went down with  her--and very few mongooses, however wise and old they may be, care to follow a cobra  into its hole. it was dark in the hole; and rikki-tikki never knew when it might open out  and give nagaina room to turn and strike at him. he held on savagely, and stuck out his  feet to act as brakes on the dark slope of the hot, moist earth. then the grass by the  mouth of the hole stopped waving, and darzee said, "it is all over with rikki-tikki! we  must sing his death song. valiant rikki-tikki is dead! for nagaina will surely kill him  underground." so he sang a very mournful song that he made up on the spur of the minute,  and just as he got to the most touching part, the grass quivered again, and rikki-tikki,  covered with dirt, dragged himself out of the hole leg by leg, licking his whiskers.darzee stopped with a little shout. rikki-tikki shook some of the dust out of his fur and  sneezed. "it is all over," he said. "the widow will never come out again." and the red  ants that live between the grass stems heard him, and began to troop down one after  another to see if he had spoken the truth. rikki-tikki curled himself up in the grass  and slept where he was--slept and slept till it was late in the afternoon, for he had done  a hard day's work. "now," he said, when he awoke, "i will go back to the house. tell the  coppersmith, darzee, and he will tell the garden that nagaina is dead." the  coppersmith is a bird who makes a noise exactly like the beating of a little hammer on a  copper pot; and the reason he is always making it is because he is the town crier to every  indian garden, and tells all the news to everybody who cares to listen. as rikki-tikki  went up the path, he heard his "attention" notes like a tiny dinner gong, and then the  steady "ding-dong-tock! nag is dead--dong! nagaina is dead! ding-dong-tock!" that  set all the birds in the garden singing, and the frogs croaking, for nag and nagaina used  to eat frogs as well as little birds. when rikki got to the house, teddy and teddy's  mother (she looked very white still, for she had been fainting) and teddy's father came  out and almost cried over him; and that night he ate all that was given him till he could  eat no more, and went to bed on teddy's shoulder, where teddy's mother saw him when she  came to look late at night. "he saved our lives and teddy's life," she said to her  husband. "just think, he saved all our lives." rikki-tikki woke up with a jump, for the  mongooses are light sleepers. "oh, it's you," said he. "what are you bothering for? all  the cobras are dead. and if they weren't, i'm here." rikki-tikki had a right to be proud  of himself. but he did not grow too proud, and he kept that garden as a mongoose should  keep it, with tooth and jump and spring and bite, till never a cobra dared show its head  inside the walls.mother says that when i start talking i never know when to stop. but i tell her the only time i get a chance is when she ain't around, so i have to make the most of it. i guess the fact is neither one of us would be welcome in a quaker meeting, but as i tell mother, what did god give us tongues for if he didn't want we should use them? only she says he didn't give them to us to say the same thing over and over again, like i do, and repeat myself. but i say:"well, mother," i say, "when people is like you and i and been married fifty years, do you expect everything i say will be something you ain't heard me say before? but it may be new to others, as they ain't nobody else lived with me as long as you have."so she says:"you can bet they ain't, as they couldn't nobody else stand you that long.""well," i tell her, "you look pretty healthy.""maybe i do," she will say, "but i looked even healthier before i married you."you can't get ahead of mother.yes, sir, we was married just fifty years ago the seventeenth day of last december and my daughter and son-in-law was over from trenton to help us celebrate the golden wedding. my son-in-law is john h. kramer, the real estate man. he made $12,000 one year and is pretty well thought of around trenton; a good, steady, hard worker. the rotarians was after him a long time to join, but he kept telling them his home was his club. but edie finally made him join. that's my daughter.well, anyway, they come over to help us celebrate the golden wedding and it was pretty crimpy weather and the furnace don't seem to heat up no more like it used to and mother made the remark that she hoped this winter wouldn't be as cold as the last, referring to the winter previous. so edie said if she was us, and nothing to keep us home, she certainly wouldn't spend no more winters up here and why didn't we just shut off the water and close up the house and go down to tampa, florida? you know we was there four winters ago and staid five weeks, but it cost us over three hundred and fifty dollars for hotel bill alone. so mother said we wasn't going no place to be robbed. so my son-in-law spoke up and said that tampa wasn't the only place in the south, and besides we didn't have to stop at no high price hotel but could rent us a couple rooms and board out somewheres, and he had heard that st. petersburg, florida, was the spot and if we said the word he would write down there and make inquiries.well, to make a long story short, we decided to do it and edie said it would be our golden honeymoon and for a present my son-in-law paid the difference between a section and a compartment so as we could have a compartment and have more privatecy. in a compartment you have an upper and lower berth just like the regular sleeper, but it is a shut in room by itself and got a wash bowl. the car we went in was all compartments and no regular berths at all. it was all compartments.we went to trenton the night before and staid at my daughter and son-in-law and we left trenton the next afternoon at 3.23 p.m.this was the twelfth day of january. mother set facing the front of the train, as it makes her giddy to ride backwards. i set facing her, which does not affect me. we reached north philadelphia at 4.03 p.m. and we reached west philadelphia at 4.14, but did not go into broad street. we reached baltimore at 6.30 and washington, d.c., at 7.25. our train laid over in washington two hours till another train come along to pick us up and i got out and strolled up the platform and into the union station. when i come back, our car had been switched on to another track, but i remembered the name of it, the la belle, as i had once visited my aunt out in oconomowoc, wisconsin, where there was a lake of that name, so i had no difficulty in getting located. but mother had nearly fretted herself sick for fear i would be left."well," i said, "i would of followed you on the next train.""you could of," said mother, and she pointed out that she had the money."well," i said, "we are in washington and i could of borrowed from the united states treasury. i would of pretended i was an englishman."mother caught the point and laughed heartily.our train pulled out of washington at 9.40 p.m. and mother and i turned in early, i taking the upper. during the night we passed through the green fields of old virginia, though it was too dark to tell if they was green or what color. when we got up in the morning, we was at fayetteville, north carolina. we had breakfast in the dining car and after breakfast i got in conversation with the man in the next compartment to ours. he was from lebanon, new hampshire, and a man about eighty years of age. his wife was with him, and two unmarried daughters and i made the remark that i should think the four of them would be crowded in one compartment, but he said they had made the trip every winter for fifteen years and knowed how to keep out of each other's way. he said they was bound for tarpon springs.we reached charleston, south carolina, at 12.50 p.m. and arrived at savannah, georgia, at 4.20. we reached jacksonville, florida, at 8.45 p.m. and had an hour and a quarter to lay over there, but mother made a fuss about me getting off the train, so we had the darky make up our berths and retired before we left jacksonville. i didn't sleep good as the train done a lot of hemming and hawing, and mother never sleeps good on a train as she says she is always worrying that i will fall out. she says she would rather have the upper herself, as then she would not have to worry about me, but i tell her i can't take the risk of having it get out that i allowed my wife to sleep in an upper berth. it would make talk.we was up in the morning in time to see our friends from new hampshire get off at tarpon springs, which we reached at 6.53 a.m.several of our fellow passengers got off at clearwater and some at belleair, where the train backs right up to the door of the mammoth hotel. belleair is the winter headquarters for the golf dudes and everybody that got off there had their bag of sticks, as many as ten and twelve in a bag. women and all. when i was a young man we called it shinny and only needed one club to play with and about one game of it would of been a-plenty for some of these dudes, the way we played it.the train pulled into st. petersburg at 8.20 and when we got off the train you would think they was a riot, what with all the darkies barking for the different hotels.i said to mother, i said:"it is a good thing we have got a place picked out to go to and don't have to choose a hotel, as it would be hard to choose amongst them if every one of them is the best."she laughed.we found a jitney and i give him the address of the room my son-in-law had got for us and soon we was there and introduced ourselves to the lady that owns the house, a young widow about forty-eight years of age. she showed us our room, which was light and airy with a comfortable bed and bureau and washstand. it was twelve dollars a week, but the location was good, only three blocks from williams park.st. pete is what folks calls the town, though they also call it the sunshine city, as they claim they's no other place in the country where they's fewer days when old sol don't smile down on mother earth, and one of the newspapers gives away all their copies free every day when the sun don't shine. they claim to of only give them away some sixty-odd times in the last eleven years. another nickname they have got for the town is "the poor man's palm beach," but i guess they's men that comes there that could borrow as much from the bank as some of the willie boys over to the other palm beach.during our stay we paid a visit to the lewis tent city, which is the headquarters for the tin can tourists. but maybe you ain't heard about them. well, they are an organization that takes their vacation trips by auto and carries everything with them. that is, they bring along their tents to sleep in and cook in and they don't patronize no hotels or cafeterias, but they have got to be bona fide auto campers or they can't belong to the organization.they tell me they's over 200,000 members to it and they call themselves the tin canners on account of most of their food being put up in tin cans. one couple we seen in the tent city was a couple from brady, texas, named mr. and mrs. pence, which the old man is over eighty years of age and they had come in their auto all the way from home, a distance of 1,641 miles. they took five weeks for the trip, mr. pence driving the entire distance.the tin canners hails from every state in the union and in the summer time they visit places like new england and the great lakes region, but in the winter the most of them comes to florida and scatters all over the state. while we was down there, they was a national convention of them at gainesville, florida, and they elected a fredonia, new york, man as their president. his title is royal tin can opener of the world. they have got a song wrote up which everybody has got to learn it before they are a member:"the tin can forever! hurrah, boys! hurrah!   up with the tin can! down with the foe!   we will rally round the campfire, we'll rally once again,   shouting, 'we auto camp forever!'"that is something like it. and the members has also got to have a tin can fastened on to the front of their machine.i asked mother how she would like to travel around that way and she said:"fine, but not with an old rattle brain like you driving.""well," i said, "i am eight years younger than this mr. pence who drove here from texas.""yes," she said, "but he is old enough to not be skittish."you can't get ahead of mother.well, one of the first things we done in st. petersburg was to go to the chamber of commerce and register our names and where we was from as they's great rivalry amongst the different states in regards to the number of their citizens visiting in town and of course our little state don't stand much of a show, but still every little bit helps, as the fella says. all and all, the man told us, they was eleven thousand names registered, ohio leading with some fifteen hundred-odd and new york state next with twelve hundred. then come michigan, pennsylvania and so on down, with one man each from cuba and nevada.the first night we was there, they was a meeting of the new york-new jersey society at the congregational church and a man from ogdensburg, new york state, made the talk. his subject was rainbow chasing. he is a rotarian and a very convicting speaker, though i forget his name.our first business, of course, was to find a place to eat and after trying several places we run on to a cafeteria on central avenue that suited us up and down. we eat pretty near all our meals there and it averaged about two dollars per day for the two of us, but the food was well cooked and everything nice and clean. a man don't mind paying the price if things is clean and well cooked.on the third day of february, which is mother's birthday, we spread ourselves and eat supper at the poinsettia hotel and they charged us seventy-five cents for a sirloin steak that wasn't hardly big enough for one.i said to mother: "well," i said, "i guess it's a good thing every day ain't your birthday or we would be in the poorhouse.""no," says mother, "because if every day was my birthday, i would be old enough by this time to of been in my grave long ago."you can't get ahead of mother.in the hotel they had a card-room where they was several men and ladies playing five hundred and this new fangled whist bridge. we also seen a place where they was dancing, so i asked mother would she like to trip tne light fantastic toe and she said no, she was too old to squirm like you have got to do now days. we watched some of the young folks at it awhile till mother got disgusted and said we would have to see a good movie to take the taste out of our mouth. mother is a great movie heroyne and we go twice a week here at home.but i want to tell you about the park. the second day we was there we visited the park, which is a good deal like the one in tampa, only bigger, and they's more fun goes on here every day than you could shake a stick at. in the middle they's a big bandstand and chairs for the folks to set and listen to the concerts, which they give you music for all tastes, from dixie up to classical pieces like hearts and flowers.then all around they's places marked off for different sports and games--chess and checkers and dominoes for folks that enjoys those kind of games, and roque and horse-shoes for the nimbler ones. i used to pitch a pretty fair shoe myself, but ain't done much of it in the last twenty years.well, anyway, we bought a membership ticket in the club which costs one dollar for the season, and they tell me that up to a couple years ago it was fifty cents, but they had to raise it to keep out the riffraff.well, mother and i put in a great day watching the pitchers and she wanted i should get in the game, but i told her i was all out of practice and would make a fool of myself, though i seen several men pitching who i guess i could take their measure without no practice. however, they was some good pitchers, too, and one boy from akron, ohio, who could certainly throw a pretty shoe. they told me it looked like he would win them championship of the united states in the february tournament. we come away a few days before they held that and i never did hear if he win. i forget his name, but he was a clean cut young fella and he has got a brother in cleveland that's a rotarian.well, we just stood around and watched the different games for two or three days and finally i set down in a checker game with a man named weaver from danville, illinois. he was a pretty fair checker player, but he wasn't no match for me, and i hope that don't sound like bragging. but i always could hold my own on a checker-board and the folks around here will tell you the same thing. i played with this weaver pretty near all morning for two or three mornings and he beat me one game and the only other time it looked like he had a chance, the noon whistle blowed and we had to quit and go to dinner.while i was playing checkers, mother would set and listen to the band, as she loves music, classical or no matter what kind, but anyway she was setting there one day and between selections the woman next to her opened up a conversation. she was a woman about mother's own age, seventy or seventy-one, and finally she asked mother's name and mother told her her name and where she was from and mother asked her the same question, and who do you think the woman was?well, sir, it was the wife of frank m. hartsell, the man who was engaged to mother till i stepped in and cut him out, fifty-two years ago!yes, sir!you can imagine mother's surprise! and mrs. hartsell was surprised, too, when mother told her she had once been friends with her husband, though mother didn't say how close friends they had been, or that mother and i was the cause of hartsell going out west. but that's what we was. hartsell left his town a month after the engagement was broke off and ain't never been back since. he had went out to michigan and become a veterinary, and that is where he had settled down, in hillsdale, michigan, and finally married his wife.well, mother screwed up her courage to ask if frank was still living and mrs. hartsell took her over to where they was pitching horse-shoes and there was old frank, waiting his turn. and he knowed mother as soon as he seen her, though it was over fifty years. he said he knowed her by her eyes."why, it's lucy frost!" he says, and he throwed down his shoes and quit the game.then they come over and hunted me up and i will confess i wouldn't of knowed him. him and i is the same age to the month, but he seems to show it more, some way. he is balder for one thing. and his beard is all white, where mine has still got a streak of brown in it. the very first thing i said to him, i said:"well, frank, that beard of yours makes me feel like i was back north. it looks like a regular blizzard.""well," he said, "i guess yourn would be just as white if you had it dry cleaned."but mother wouldn't stand that."is that so!" she said to frank. "well, chancy ain't had no tobacco in his mouth for over ten years!"and i ain't!well, i excused myself from the checker game and it was pretty close to noon, so we decided to all have dinner together and they was nothing for it only we must try their cafeteria on third avenue. it was a little more expensive than ours and not near as good, i thought. i and mother had about the same dinner we had been having every day and our bill was $1.10. frank's check was $1.20 for he and his wife. the same meal wouldn't of cost them more than a dollar at our place.after dinner we made them come up to our house and we all set in the parlor, which the young woman had give us the use of to entertain company. we begun talking over old times and mother said she was a-scared mrs. hartsell would find it tiresome listening to we three talk over old times, but as it turned out they wasn't much chance for nobody else to talk with mrs. hartsell in the company. i have heard lots of women that could go it, but hartsell's wife takes the cake of all the women i ever seen. she told us the family history of everybody in the state of michigan and bragged for a half hour about her son, who she said is in the drug business in grand rapids, and a rotarian.when i and hartsell could get a word in edgeways we joked one another back and forth and i chafed him about being a horse doctor."well, frank," i said, " you look pretty prosperous, so i suppose they's been plenty of glanders around hillsdale.""well," he said, "i've managed to make more than a fair living. but i've worked pretty hard.""yes," i said, "and i suppose you get called out all hours of the night to attend births and so on."mother made me shut up.well, i thought they wouldn't never go home and i and mother was in misery trying to keep awake, as the both of us generally always takes a nap after dinner. finally they went, after we had made an engagement to meet them in the park the next morning, and mrs. hartsell also invited us to come to their place the next night and play five hundred. but she had forgot that they was a meeting of the michigan society that evening, so it was not till two evenings later that we had our first card game.hartsell and his wife lived in a house on third avenue north and had a private setting room besides their bedroom. mrs. hartsell couldn't quit talking about their private setting room like it was something wonderful. we played cards with them, with mother and hartsell partners against his wife and i. mrs. hartsell is a miserable card player and we certainly got the worst of it.after the game she brought out a dish of oranges and we had to pretend it was just what we wanted, though oranges down there is like a young man's whiskers; you enjoy them at first, but they get to be a pesky nuisance.we played cards again the next night at our place with the same partners and i and mrs. hartsell was beat again. mother and hartsell was full of compliments for each other on what a good team they made, but the both of them knowed well enough where the secret of their success laid. i guess all and all we must of played ten different evenings and they was only one night when mrs. hartsell and i come out ahead. and that one night wasn't no fault of hern.when we had been down there about two weeks, we spent one evening as their guest in the congregational church, at a social give by the michigan society. a talk was made by a man named bitting of detroit, michigan, on how i was cured of story telling. he is a big man in the rotarians and give a witty talk.a woman named mrs. oxford rendered some selections which mrs. hartsell said was grand opera music, but whatever they was my daughter edie could of give her cards and spades and not made such a hullaballoo about it neither.then they was a ventriloquist from grand rapids and a young woman about forty-five years of age that mimicked different kinds of birds. i whispered to mother that they all sounded like a chicken, but she nudged me to shut up.after the show we stopped in a drug store and i set up the refreshments and it was pretty close to ten o'clock before we finally turned in. mother and i would of preferred tending the movies, but mother said we mustn't offend mrs. hartsell, though i asked her had we came to florida to enjoy ourselves or to just not offend an old chatter-box from michigan.i felt sorry for hartsell one morning. the women folks both had an engagement down to the chiropodist's and i run across hartsell in the park and he foolishly offered to play me checkers.it was him that suggested it, not me, and i guess he repented himself before we had played one game. but he was too stubborn to give up and set there while i beat him game after game and the worst part of it was that a crowd of folks had got in the habit of watching me play and there they all was, hooking on, and finally they seen what a fool frank was making of himself, and they began to chafe him and pass remarks. like one of them said:"who ever told you you was a checker player!"and:"you might maybe be good for tiddle-de-winks, but not checkers!i almost felt like letting him beat me a couple games. but the crowd would of knowed it was a put up job.well, the women folks joined us in the park and i wasn't going to mention our little game, but hartsell told about it himself and admitted he wasn't no match for me."well," said mrs. hartsell, "checkers ain't much of a game anyway, is it?" she said: "it's more of a children's game, ain't it? at least, i know my boy's children used to play it a good deal.""yes, ma'am," i said. "it's a children's game the way your husband plays it, too."mother wanted to smooth things over, so she said:"maybe they's other games where frank can beat you.""yes," said mrs. hartsell, "and i bet he could beat you pitching horse-shoes.""well," i said, "i would give him a chance to try, only i ain't pitched a shoe in over sixteen years.""well," said hartsell, "i ain't played checkers in twenty years.""you ain't never played it," i said."anyway," says frank, "lucy and i is your master at five hundred."well, i could of told him why that was, but had decency enough to hold my tongue.it had got so now that he wanted to play cards every night and when i or mother wanted to go to a movie, any one of us would have to pretend we had a headache and then trust to goodness that they wouldn't see us sneak into the theater. i don't mind playing cards when my partner keeps their mind on the game, but you take a woman like hartsell's wife and how can they play cards when they have got to stop every couple seconds and brag about their son in grand rapids?well, the new york-new jersey society announced that they was goin' to give a social evening too and i said to mother, i said:"well, that is one evening when we will have an excuse not to play five hundred.""yes," she said, "but we will have to ask frank and his wife to go to the social with us as they asked us to go to the michigan social.""well," i said, "i had rather stay home than drag that chatterbox everywheres we go."so mother said:"you are getting too cranky. maybe she does talk a little too much but she is good hearted. and frank is always good company."so i said:"i suppose if he is such good company you wished you had of married him."mother laughed and said i sounded like i was jealous. jealous of a cow doctor!anyway we had to drag them along to the social and i will say that we give them a much better entertainment than they had given us.judge lane of paterson made a fine talk on business conditions and a mrs. newell of westfield imitated birds, only you could really tell what they was the way she done it. two young women from red bank sung a choral selection and we clapped them back and they gave us home to our mountains and mother and mrs. hartsell both had tears in their eyes. and hartsell, too.well, some way or another the chairman got wind that i was there and asked me to make a talk and i wasn't even going to get up, but mother made me, so i got up and said:"ladies and gentlemen," i said. "i didn't expect to be called on for a speech on an occasion like this or no other occasion as i do not set myself up as a speech maker, so will have to do the best i can, which i often say is the best anybody can do."then i told them the story about pat and the motorcycle, using the brogue, and it seemed to tickle them and i told them one or two other stories, hut altogether i wasn't on my feet more than twenty or twenty-five minutes and you ought to of heard the clapping and hollering when i set down. even mrs. hartsell admitted that i am quite a speechifier and said if i ever went to grand rapids, michigan, her son would make me talk to the rotarians.when it was over, hartsell wanted we should go to their house and play cards, but his wife reminded him that it was after 9.30 p.m., rather a late hour to start a card game, but he had went crazy on the subject of cards, probably because he didn't have to play partners with his wife. anyway, we got rid of them and went home to bed.it was the next morning, when we met over to the park, that mrs. hartsell made the remark that she wasn't getting no exercise so i suggested that why didn't she take part in the roque game.she said she had not played a game of roque in twenty years, but if mother would play she would play. well, at first mother wouldn't hear of it, but finally consented, more to please mrs. hartsell than anything else.well, they had a game with a mrs. ryan from eagle, nebraska, and a young mrs. morse from rutland, vermont, who mother had met down to the chiropodist's. well, mother couldn't hit a flea and they all laughed at her and i couldn't help from laughing at her myself and finally she quit and said her back was too lame to stoop over. so they got another lady and kept on playing and soon mrs. hartsell was the one everybody was laughing at, as she had a long shot to hit the black ball, and as she made the effort her teeth fell out on to the court. i never seen a woman so flustered in my life. and i never heard so much laughing, only mrs. hartsell didn't join in and she was madder than a hornet and wouldn't play no more, so the game broke up.mrs. hartsell went home without speaking to nobody, but hartsell stayed around and finally he said to me, he said:"well, i played you checkers the other day and you beat me bad and now what do you say if you and me play a game of horseshoes?"i told him i hadn't pitched a shoe in sixteen years, but mother said:"go ahead and play. you used to be good at it and maybe it will come back to you."well, to make a long story short, i give in. i oughtn't to of never tried it, as i hadn't pitched a shoe in sixteen years, and i only done it to humor hartsell.before we started, mother patted me on the back and told me to do my best, so we started in and i seen right off that i was in for it, as i hadn't pitched a shoe in sixteen years and didn't have my distance. and besides, the plating had wore off the shoes so that they was points right where they stuck into my thumb and i hadn't throwed more than two or three times when my thumb was raw and it pretty near killed me to hang on to the shoe, let alone pitch it.well, hartsell throws the awkwardest shoe i ever seen pitched and to see him pitch you wouldn't think he would ever come nowheres near, but he is also the luckiest pitcher i ever seen and he made some pitches where the shoe lit five and six feet short and then schoonered up and was a ringer. they's no use trying to beat that kind of luck.they was a pretty fair size crowd watching us and four or five other ladies besides mother, and it seems like, when hartsell pitches, he has got to chew and it kept the ladies on the anxious seat as he don't seem to care which way he is facing when he leaves go.you would think a man as old as him would of learnt more manners.well, to make a long story short, i was just beginning to get my distance when i had to give up on account of my thumb, which i showed it to hartsell and he seen i couldn't go on, as it was raw and bleeding. even if i could of stood it to go on myself, mother wouldn't of allowed it after she seen my thumb. so anyway i quit and hartsell said the score was nineteen to six, but i don't know what it was. or don't care, neither.well, mother and i went home and i said i hoped we was through with the hartsells as i was sick and tired of them, but it seemed like she had promised we would go over to their house that evening for another game of their everlasting cards.well, my thumb was giving me considerable pain and i felt kind of out of sorts and i guess maybe i forgot myself, but anyway, when we was about through playing hartsell made the remark that he wouldn't never lose a game of cards if he could always have mother for a partner.so i said:"well, you had a chance fifty years ago to always have her for a partner, but you wasn't man enough to keep her."i was sorry the minute i had said it and hartsell didn't know what to say and for once his wife couldn't say nothing. mother tried to smooth things over by making the remark that i must of had something stronger than tea or i wouldn't talk so silly. but mrs. hartsell had froze up like an iceberg and hardly said good night to us and i bet her and frank put in a pleasant hour after we was gone.as we was leaving, mother said to him: "never mind charley's nonsense, frank. he is just mad because you beat him all hollow pitching horseshoes and playing cards."she said that to make up for my slip, but at the same time she certainly riled me. i tried to keep ahold of myself, but as soon as we was out of the house she had to open up the subject and begun to scold me for the break i had made.well, i wasn't in no mood to be scolded. so i said:"i guess he is such a wonderful pitcher and card player that you wished you had married him.""well," she said, "at least he ain't a baby to give up pitching because his thumb has got a few scratches.""and how about you," i said, "making a fool of yourself on the roque court and then pretemiding your back is lame and you can't play no more!""yes," she said, "but when you hurt your thumb i didn't laugh at you, and why did you laugh at me when i sprained my back?""who could help from laughing!" i said."well," she said, "frank hartsell didn't laugh.""well," i said, "why didn't you marry him?""well," said mother, "i almost wished i had!""and i wished so, too!" i said."i'll remember that!" said mother, and that's the last word she said to me for two days.we seen the hartsells the next day in the park and i was willing to apologize, but they just nodded to us. and a couple days later we heard they had left for orlando, where they have got relatives.i wished they had went there in the first place.mother and i made it up setting on a bench."listen, charley," she said. "this is our golden honeymoon and we don't want the whole thing spoilt with a silly old quarrel.""well," i said, "did you mean that about wishing you had married hartsell?""of course not," she said, "that is, if you didn't mean that you wished i had, too." so i said:"i was just tired and all wrought up. i thank god you chose me instead of him as they's no other woman in the world who i could of lived with all these years.""how about mrs. hartsell?" says mother."good gracious!" i said. "imagine being married to a woman that plays five hundred like she does and drops her teeth on the roque court!""well," said mother, "it wouldn't be no worse than being married to a man that expectorates towards ladies and is such a fool in a checker game."so i put my arm around her shoulder and she stroked my hand and i guess we got kind of spoony.they was two days left of our stay in st. petersburg and the next to the last day mother introduced me to a mrs. kendall from kingston, rhode island, who she had met at the chiropodist's.mrs. kendall made us acquainted with her husband, who is in the grocery business. they have got two sons and five grandchildren and one great-grandchild. one of their sons lives in providence and is way up in the elks as well as a rotarian.we found them very congenial people and we played cards with them the last two nights we was there. they was both experts and i only wished we had met them sooner instead of running into the hartsells. but the kendalls will be there again next winter and we will see more of them, that is, if we decide to make the trip again.we left the sunshine city on the eleventh day of february, at 11 a.m. this give us a day trip through florida and we seen all the country we had passed through at night on the way down.we reached jacksonville at 7 p.m. and pulled out of there at 8.10 p.m. we reached fayetteville, north carolina, at nine o'clock the following morning, and reached washington, d. c., at 6.30 p.m., laying over there half an hour.we reached trenton at 11.01 p.m. and had wired ahead to my daughter and son-in-law and they met us at the train and we went to their house and they put us up for the night. john would of made us stay up all night, telling about our trip, but edie said we must be tired and made us go to bed. that's my daughter.the next day we took our train for home and arrived safe and sound, having been gone just one month and a day.here comes mother, so i guess i better shut up.i got another barber that comes over from carterville and helps me out saturdays, but the rest of the time i can get along all right alone. you can see for yourself that this ain't no new york: city and besides that, the most of the boys works all day and don't have no leisure to drop in here and get themselves prettied up.you're a newcomer, ain't you? i thought i hadn't seen you round before. i hope you like it good enough to stay. as i say, we ain't no new york city or chicago, but we have pretty good times. not as good, though, since jim kendall got killed. when he was alive, him and hod meyers used to keep this town in an uproar. i bet they was more laughin' done here than any town its size in america.jim was comical, and hod was pretty near a match for him. since jim's gone, hod tries to hold his end up just the same as ever, but it's tough goin' when you ain't got nobody to kind of work with.they used to be plenty fun in here saturdays. this place is jampacked saturdays, from four o'clock on. jim and hod would show up right after their supper round six o'clock. jim would set himself down in that big chair, nearest the blue spittoon. whoever had been settin' in that chair, why they'd get up when jim come in and at" it to him.you'd of thought it was a reserved seat like they have sometimes in a theaytre. hod would generally always stand or walk up and down or some saturdays, of course, he'd be settin' in this chair part of the time, gettin' a haircut.well, jim would set there a w'ile without opening his mouth only to spit, and then finally he'd say to me, "whitey,"--my right name, that is, my right first name, is dick, but everybody round here calls me whitey--jim would say, "whitey, your nose looks like a rosebud tonight. you must of been drinkin' some of your aw de cologne."so i'd say, "no, jim, but you look like you'd been drinkin' something of that kind or somethin' worse."jim would have to laugh at that, but then he'd speak up and say, "no, i ain't had nothin' to drink, but that ain't sayin' i wouldn't like somethin'. i wouldn't even mind if it was wood alcohol."then hod meyers would say, "neither would your wife." that would set everybody to laughin' because jim and his wife wasn't on very good terms. she'd of divorced him only they wasn't no chance to get alimony and she didn't have no way to take care of herself and the kids. she couldn't never understand jim. he was kind of rough, but a good fella at heart.him and hod had all kinds of sport with milt sheppard. i don't suppose you've seen milt. well, he's got an adam's apple that looks more like a mush-melon. so i'd be shavin' milt and when i'd start to shave down here on his neck, hod would holler, "hey, whitey, wait a minute! before you cut into it, let's make up a pool and see who can guess closest to the number of seeds."and jim would say, "if milt hadn't of been so hoggish, he'd of ordered a half a cantaloupe instead of a whole one and it might not of stuck in his throat."all the boys would roar at this and milt himself would force a smile, though the joke was on him. jim certainly was a card!there's his shavin' mug, setting on the shelf, right next to charley vail's. "charles m. vail." that's the druggist. he comes in regular for his shave, three times a week. and jim's is the cup next to charley's. "dames h. kendall." jim won't need no shavin' mug no more, but i'll leave it there just the same for old time's sake. jim certainly was a character!years ago, jim used to travel for a canned goods concern over in carterville. they sold canned goods. jim had the whole northern half of the state and was on the road five days out of every week. he'd drop in here saturdays and tell his experiences for that week. it was rich.i guess he paid more attention to playin' jokes than makin' sales. finally the concern let him out and he come right home here and told everybody he'd been fired instead of sayin' he'd resigned like most fellas would of.it was a saturday and the shop was full and jim got up out of that chair and says, "gentlemen, i got an important announcement to make. i been fired from my job."well, they asked him if he was in earnest and he said he was and nobody could think of nothin' to say till jim finally broke the ice himself. he says, "i been sellin' canned goods and now i'm canned goods myself.you see, the concern he'd been workin' for was a factory that made canned goods. over in carterville. and now jim said he was canned himself. he was certainly a card!jim had a great trick that he used to play w'ile he was travelin'. for instance, he'd be ridin' on a train and they'd come to some little town like, well, like, well, like, we'll say, like benton. jim would look out the train window and read the signs of the stores.for instance, they'd be a sign, "henry smith, dry goods." well, jim would write down the name and the name of the town and when he got to wherever he was goin' he'd mail back a postal card to henry smith at benton and not sign no name to it, but he'd write on the card, well somethin' like "ask your wife about that book agent that spent the afternoon last week," or "ask your missus who kept her from gettin' lonesome the last time you was in carterville." and he'd sign the card, "a friend."of course, he never knew what really come of none of these jokes, but he could picture what probably happened and that was enough.jim didn't work very steady after he lost his position with the carterville people. what he did earn, coin' odd jobs round town why he spent pretty near all of it on gin, and his family might of starved if the stores hadn't of carried them along. jim's wife tried her hand at dressmakin', but they ain't nobody goin' to get rich makin' dresses in this town.as i say, she'd of divorced jim, only she seen that she couldn't support herself and the kids and she was always hopin' that some day jim would cut out his habits and give her more than two or three dollars a week.they was a time when she would go to whoever he was workin' for and ask them to give her his wages, but after she done this once or twice, he beat her to it by borrowin' most of his pay in advance. he told it all round town, how he had outfoxed his missus. he certainly was a caution!but he wasn't satisfied with just outwittin' her. he was sore the way she had acted, tryin' to grab off his pay. and he made up his mind he'd get even. well, he waited till evans's circus was advertised to come to town. then he told his wife and two kiddies that he was goin' to take them to the circus. the day of the circus, he told them he would get the tickets and meet them outside the entrance to the tent.well, he didn't have no intentions of bein' there or buyin' tickets or nothin'. he got full of gin and laid round wright's poolroom all day. his wife and the kids waited and waited and of course he didn't show up. his wife didn't have a dime with her, or nowhere else, i guess. so she finally had to tell the kids it was all off and they cried like they wasn't never goin' to stop.well, it seems, w'ile they was cryin', doc stair come along and he asked what was the matter, but mrs. kendall was stubborn and wouldn't tell him, but the kids told him and he insisted on takin' them and their mother in the show. jim found this out afterwards and it was one reason why he had it in for doc stair.doc stair come here about a year and a half ago. he's a mighty handsome young fella and his clothes always look like he has them made to order. he goes to detroit two or three times a year and w'ile he's there must have a tailor take his measure and then make him a suit to order. they cost pretty near twice as much, but they fit a whole lot better than if you just bought them in a store.for a w'ile everybody was wonderin' why a young doctor like doc stair should come to a town like this where we already got old doc gamble and doc foote that's both been here for years and all the practice in town was always divided between the two of them.then they was a story got round that doc stair's gal had thronged him over, a gal up in the northern peninsula somewhere, and the reason he come here was to hide himself away and forget it. he said himself that he thought they wasn't nothin' like general practice in a place like ours to fit a man to be a good all round doctor. and that's why he'd came.anyways, it wasn't long before he was makin' enough to live on, though they tell me that he never dunned nobody for what they owed him, and the folks here certainly has got the owin' habit, even in my business. if i had all that was comin' to me for just shaves alone, i could go to carterville and put up at the mercer for a week and see a different picture every night. for instance, they's old george purdy--but i guess i shouldn't ought to be gossipin'.well, last year, our coroner died, died of the flu. ken beatty, that was his name. he was the coroner. so they had to choose another man to be coroner in his place and they picked doc stair. he laughed at first and said he didn't want it, but they made him take it. it ain't no job that anybody would fight for and what a man makes out of it in a year would just about buy seeds for their garden. doc's the kind, though, that can't say no to nothin' if you keep at him long enough.but i was goin' to tell you about a poor boy we got here in town-paul dickson. he fell out of a tree when he was about ten years old. lit on his head and it done somethin' to him and he ain't never been right. no harm in him, but just silly. jim kendall used to call him cuckoo; that's a name jim had for anybody that was off their head, only he called people's head their bean. that was another of his gags, callin' head bean and callin' crazy people cuckoo. only poor paul ain't crazy, but just silly.you can imagine that jim used to have all kinds of fun with paul. he'd send him to the white front garage for a left-handed monkey wrench. of course they ain't no such thing as a left-handed monkey wrench.and once we had a kind of a fair here and they was a baseball game between the fats and the leans and before the game started jim called paul over and sent him way down to schrader's hardware store to get a key for the pitcher's box.they wasn't nothin' in the way of gags that jim couldn't think up, when he put his mind to it.poor paul was always kind of suspicious of people, maybe on account of how jim had kept foolin' him. paul wouldn't have much to do with anybody only his own mother and doc stair and a girl here in town named julie gregg. that is, she ain't a girl no more, but pretty near thirty or over.when doc first come to town, paul seemed to feel like here was a real friend and he hung round doc's office most of the w'ile; the only time he wasn't there was when he'd go home to eat or sleep or when he seen julie gregg coin' her shoppin'.when he looked out doc's window and seen her, he'd run downstairs and join her and tag along with her to the different stores. the poor boy was crazy about julie and she always treated him mighty nice and made him feel like he was welcome, though of course it wasn't nothin' but pity on her side.doc done all he could to improve paul's mind and he told me once that he really thought the boy was getting better, that they was times when he was as bright and sensible as anybody else.but i was goin' to tell you about julie gregg. old man gregg was in the lumber business, but got to drinkin' and lost the most of his money and when he died, he didn't leave nothin' but the house and just enough insurance for the girl to skimp along on.her mother was a kind of a half invalid and didn't hardly ever leave the house. julie wanted to sell the place and move somewhere else after the old man died, but the mother said she was born here and would die here. it was tough on julie as the young people round this town--well, she's too good for them.she'd been away to school and chicago and new york and different places and they ain't no subject she can't talk on, where you take the rest of the young folks here and you mention anything to them outside of gloria swanson or tommy meighan and they think you're delirious. did you see gloria in wages of virtue? you missed somethin'!well, doc stair hadn't been here more than a week when he came in one day to get shaved and i recognized who he was, as he had been pointed out to me, so i told him about my old lady. she's been ailin' for a couple years and either doc gamble or doc foote, neither one, seemed to be helpin' her. so he said he would come out and see her, but if she was able to get out herself, it would be better to bring her to his office where he could make a completer examination.so i took her to his office and w'ile i was waitin' for her in the reception room, in come julie gregg. when somebody comes in doc stair's office, they's a bell that rings in his inside office so he can tell they's somebody to see him.so he left my old lady inside and come out to the front office and that's the first time him and julie met and i guess it was what they call love at first sight. but it wasn't fifty-fifty. this young fella was the slickest lookin' fella she'd ever seen in this town and she went wild over him. to him she was just a young lady that wanted to see the doctor.she'd came on about the same business i had. her mother had been doctorin' for years with doc gamble and doc foote and without no results. so she'd heard they was a new doc in town and decided to give him a try. he promised to call and see her mother that same day.i said a minute ago that it was love at first sight on her part. i'm not only judgin' by how she acted afterwards but how she looked at him that first day in his office. i ain't no mind reader, but it was wrote all over her face that she was gone.now jim kendall, besides bein' a jokesmith and a pretty good drinker, well jim was quite a lady-killer. i guess he run pretty wild durin' the time he was on the road for them carterville people, and besides that, he'd had a couple little affairs of the heart right here in town. as i say, his wife would have divorced him, only she couldn't.but jim was like the majority of men, and women, too, i guess. he wanted what he couldn't get. he wanted julie gregg and worked his head off tryin' to land her. only he'd of said bean instead of head.well, jim's habits and his jokes didn't appeal to julie and of course he was a married man, so he didn't have no more chance than, well, than a rabbit. that's an expression of jim's himself. when somebody didn't have no chance to get elected or somethin', jim would always say they didn't have no more chance than a rabbit.he didn't make no bones about how he felt. right in here, more than once, in front of the whole crowd, he said he was stuck on julie and anybody that could get her for him was welcome to his house and his wife and kids included. but she wouldn't have nothin' to do with him; wouldn't even speak to him on the street. he finally seen he wasn't gettin' nowheres with his usual line so he decided to try the rough stuff. he went right up to her house one evenin' and when she opened the door he forced his way in and grabbed her. but she broke loose and before he could stop her, she run in the next room and locked the door and phoned to joe barnes. joe's the marshal. jim could hear who she was phonin' to and he beat it before joe got there.joe was an old friend of julie's pa. joe went to jim the next day and told him what would happen if he ever done it again.i don't know how the news of this little affair leaked out. chances is that joe barnes told his wife and she told somebody else's wife and they told their husband. anyways, it did leak out and hod meyers had the nerve to kid jim about it, right here in this shop. jim didn't deny nothin' and kind of laughed it off and said for us all to wait; that lots of people had tried to make a monkey out of him, but he always got even.meanw'ile everybody in town was wise to julie's bein' wild mad over the doc. i don't suppose she had any idea how her face changed when him and her was together; of course she couldn't of, or she'd of kept away from him. and she didn't know that we was all noticin' how many times she made excuses to go up to his office or pass it on the other side of the street and look up in his window to see if he was there. i felt sorry for her and so did most other people.hod meyers kept rubbin' it into jim about how the doc had cut him out. jim didn't pay no attention to the kiddie' and you could see he was plannin' one of his jokes.one trick jim had was the knack of changin' his voice. he could make you think he was a girl talkie' and he could mimic any man's voice. to show you how good he was along this line, i'll tell you the joke he played on me once.you know, in most towns of any size, when a man is dead and needs a shave, why the barber that shaves him soaks him five dollars for the job; that is, he don't soak him, but whoever ordered the shave. i just charge three dollars because personally i don't mind much shavin' a dead person. they lay a whole lot stiller than live customers. the only thing is that you don't feel like talkie' to them and you get kind of lonesome.well, about the coldest day we ever had here, two years ago last winter, the phone rung at the house w'ile i was home to dinner and i answered the phone and it was a woman's voice and she said she was mrs. john scott and her husband was dead and would i come out and shave him.old john had always been a good customer of mine. but they live seven miles out in the country, on the streeter road. still i didn't see how i could say no.so i said i would be there, but would have to come in a jitney and it might cost three or four dollars besides the price of the shave. so she, or the voice, it said that was all right, so i got frank abbott to drive me out to the place and when i got there, who should open the door but old john himself! he wasn't no more dead than, well, than a rabbit.it didn't take no private detective to figure out who had played me this little joke. nobody could of thought it up but jim kendall. he certainly was a card!i tell you this incident just to show you how he could disguise his voice and make you believe it was somebody else talkie'. i'd of swore it was mrs. scott had called me. anyways, some woman.well, jim waited till he had doc stair's voice down pat; then he went after revenge.he called julie up on a night when he knew doc was over in carterville. she never questioned but what it was doc's voice. jim said he must see her that night; he couldn't wait no longer to tell her somethin'. she was all excited and told him to come to the house. but he said he was expectin' an important long distance call and wouldn't she please forget her manners for once and come to his office. he said they couldn't nothin' hurt her and nobody would see her and he just must talk to her a little w'ile. well, poor julie fell for it.doc always keeps a night light in his office, so it looked to julie like they was somebody there.meanw'ile jim kendall had went to wright's poolroom, where they was a whole gang amusin' themselves. the most of them had drank plenty of gin, and they was a rough bunch even when sober. they was always strong for jim's jokes and when he told them to come with him and see some fun they give up their card games and pool games and followed along.doc's office is on the second floor. right outside his door they's a flight of stairs leadin' to the floor above. jim and his gang hid in the dark behind these stairs.well, tulle come up to doc's door and rung the bell and they was nothin' coin'. she rung it again and she rung it seven or eight times. then she tried the door and found it locked. then jim made some kind of a noise and she heard it and waited a minute, and then she says, "is that you, ralph?" ralph is doc's first name.they was no answer and it must of came to her all of a sudden that she'd been bunked. she pretty near fell downstairs and the whole gang after her. they chased her all the way home, hollerin', "is that you, ralph?" and "oh, ralphie, dear, is that you?" jim says he couldn't holler it himself, as he was laughin' too hard.poor julie! she didn't show up here on main street for a long, long time afterward.and of course jim and his gang told everybody in town, everybody but doc stair. they was scared to tell him, and he might of never knowed only for paul dickson. the poor cuckoo, as jim called him, he was here in the shop one night when jim was still gloatin' yet over what he'd done to julie. and paul took in as much of it as he could understand and he run to doc with the story.it's a cinch doc went up in the air and swore he'd make jim suffer. but it was a kind of a delicate thing, because if it got out that he had beat jim up, julie was bound to hear of it and then she'd know that doc knew and of course knowin' that he knew would make it worse for her than ever. he was goin' to do somethin', but it took a lot of figurin'.well, it was a couple days later when jim was here in the shop again, and so was the cuckoo. jim was goin' duck-shootin' the next day and had come in lookin' for hod meyers to go with him. i happened to know that hod had went over to carterville and wouldn't be home till the end of the week. so jim said he hated to go alone and he guessed he would call it off. then poor paul spoke up and said if jim would take him he would go along. jim thought a w'ile and then he said, well, he guessed a half-wit was better than nothin'.i suppose he was plottin' to get paul out in the boat and play some joke on him, like pushin' him in the water. anyways, he said paul could go. he asked him had he ever shot a duck and paul said no, he'd never even had a gun in his hands. so jim said he could set in the boat and watch him and if he behaved himself, he might lend him his gun for a couple of shots. they made a date to meet in the mornin' and that's the last i seen of jim alive.next mornin', i hadn't been open more than ten minutes when doc stair come in. he looked kind of nervous. he asked me had i seen paul dickson. i said no, but i knew where he was, out duckshootin' with jim kendall. so doc says that's what he had heard, and he couldn't understand it because paul had told him he wouldn't never have no more to do with jim as long as he lived.he said paul had told him about the joke jim had played on julie. he said paul had asked him what he thought of the joke and the doc told him that anybody that would do a thing like that ought not to be let live. i said it had been a kind of a raw thing, but jim just couldn't resist no kind of a joke, no matter how raw. i said i thought he was all right at heart, but just bubblin' over with mischief. doc turned and walked out.at noon he got a phone call from old john scott. the lake where jim and paul had went shootin' is on john's place. paul had came runnin' up to the house a few minutes before and said they'd been an accident. jim had shot a few ducks and then give the gun to paul and told him to try his luck. paul hadn't never handled a gun and he was nervous. he was shakin' so hard that he couldn't control the gun. he let fire and jim sunk back in the boat, dead.doc stair, bein' the coroner, jumped in frank abbott's flivver and rushed out to scott's farm. paul and old john was down on the shore of the lake. paul had rowed the boat to shore, but they'd left the body in it, waiting for doc to come.doc examined the body and said they might as well fetch it back to town. they was no use leavin' it there or callin' a jury, as it was a plain case of accidental shootin'.personally i wouldn't never leave a person shoot a gun in the same boat i was in unless i was sure they knew somethin' about guns. jim was a sucker to leave a new beginner have his gun, let alone a half-wit. it probably served jim right, what he got. but still we miss him round here. he certainly was a card! comb it wet or dry?there was a woman who was beautiful, who started with all the advantages, yet she had no luck. she married for love, and the love turned to dust. she had bonny children, yet she felt they had been thrust upon her, and she could not love them. they looked at her coldly, as if they were finding fault with her.  and hurriedly she felt she must cover up some fault in herself. yet what it was that she must cover up she never knew. nevertheless, when her children were present, she always felt the centre of her heart go hard. this troubled her, and in her manner she was all the more gentle and anxious for her children, as if she loved them very much. only she herself knew that at the centre of her heart was a hard little place that could not feel love, no, not for anybody. everybody else said of her: "she is such a good mother. she adores her children." only she herself, and her children themselves, knew it was not so. they read it in each other's eyes.there were a boy and two little girls. they lived in a pleasant house, with a garden, and they had discreet servants, and felt themselves superior to anyone in the neighbourhood.although they lived in style, they felt always an anxiety in the house. there was never enough money. the mother had a small income, and the father had a small income, but not nearly enough for the social position which they had to keep up. the father went into town to some office. but though he had good prospects, these prospects never materialised. there was always the grinding sense of the shortage of money, though the style was always kept up.at last the mother said: "i will see if i can't make something." but she did not know where to begin. she racked her brains, and tried this thing and the other, but could not find anything successful. the failure made deep lines come into her face. her children were growing up, they would have to go to school. there must be more money, there must be more money. the father, who was always very handsome and expensive in his tastes, seemed as if he never would be able to do anything worth doing. and the mother, who had a great belief in herself, did not succeed any better, and her tastes were just as expensive.and so the house came to be haunted by the unspoken phrase: there must be more money! there must be more money! the children could hear it all the time though nobody said it aloud. they heard it at christmas, when the expensive and splendid toys filled the nursery.  behind the shining modern rocking-horse, behind the smart doll's house, a voice would start whispering: "there must be more money! there must be more money!" and the children would stop playing, to listen for a moment. they would look into each other's eyes, to see if they had all heard. and each one saw in the eyes of the other two that they too had heard. "there must be more money! there must be more money!"it came whispering from the springs of the still-swaying rocking-horse, and even the horse, bending his wooden, champing head, heard it. the big doll, sitting so pink and smirking in her new pram, could hear it quite plainly, and seemed to be smirking all the more self-consciously because of it. the foolish puppy, too, that took the place of the teddy-bear, he was looking so extraordinarily foolish for no other reason but that he heard the secret whisper all over the house: "there must be more money!"yet nobody ever said it aloud. the whisper was everywhere, and therefore no one spoke it. just as no one ever says: "we are breathing!" in spite of the fact that breath is coming and going all the time."mother," said the boy paul one day, "why don't we keep a car of our own? why do we always use uncle's, or else a taxi?""because we're the poor members of the family," said the mother."but why are we, mother?""well - i suppose," she said slowly and bitterly, "it's because your father has no luck."the boy was silent for some time."is luck money, mother?" he asked, rather timidly."no, paul. not quite. it's what causes you to have money.""oh!" said paul vaguely. "i thought when uncle oscar said filthy lucker, it meant money.""filthy lucre does mean money," said the mother. "but it's lucre, not luck.""oh!" said the boy. "then what is luck, mother?""it's what causes you to have money. if you're lucky you have money. that's why it's better to be born lucky than rich. if you're rich, you may lose your money. but if you're lucky, you will always get more money.""oh! will you? and is father not lucky?""very unlucky, i should say," she said bitterly.the boy watched her with unsure eyes."why?" he asked."i don't know. nobody ever knows why one person is lucky and another unlucky.""don't they? nobody at all? does nobody know?""perhaps god. but he never tells.""he ought to, then. and are'nt you lucky either, mother?""i can't be, it i married an unlucky husband.""but by yourself, aren't you?""i used to think i was, before i married. now i think i am very unlucky indeed.""why?""well - never mind! perhaps i'm not really," she said.the child looked at her to see if she meant it. but he saw, by the lines of her mouth, that she was only trying to hide something from him."well, anyhow," he said stoutly, "i'm a lucky person.""why?" said his mother, with a sudden laugh.he stared at her. he didn't even know why he had said it."god told me," he asserted, brazening it out."i hope he did, dear!", she said, again with a laugh, but rather bitter."he did, mother!""excellent!" said the mother, using one of her husband's exclamations.the boy saw she did not believe him; or rather, that she paid no attention to his assertion. this angered him somewhere, and made him want to compel her attention.he went off by himself, vaguely, in a childish way, seeking for the clue to 'luck'. absorbed, taking no heed of other people, he went about with a sort of stealth, seeking inwardly for luck. he wanted luck, he wanted it, he wanted it. when the two girls were playing dolls in the nursery, he would sit on his big rocking-horse, charging madly into space, with a frenzy that made the little girls peer at him uneasily. wildly the horse careered, the waving dark hair of the boy tossed, his eyes had a strange glare in them. the little girls dared not speak to him.when he had ridden to the end of his mad little journey, he climbed down and stood in front of his rocking-horse, staring fixedly into its lowered face. its red mouth was slightly open, its big eye was wide and glassy-bright."now!" he would silently command the snorting steed. "now take me to where there is luck! now take me!"and he would slash the horse on the neck with the little whip he had asked uncle oscar for. he knew the horse could take him to where there was luck, if only he forced it. so he would mount again and start on his furious ride, hoping at last to get there."you'll break your horse, paul!" said the nurse."he's always riding like that! i wish he'd leave off!" said his elder sister joan.but he only glared down on them in silence. nurse gave him up. she could make nothing of him. anyhow, he was growing beyond her.one day his mother and his uncle oscar came in when he was on one of his furious rides. he did not speak to them."hallo, you young jockey! riding a winner?" said his uncle."aren't you growing too big for a rocking-horse? you're not a very little boy any longer, you know," said his mother.but paul only gave a blue glare from his big, rather close-set eyes. he would speak to nobody when he was in full tilt.  his mother watched him with an anxious expression on her face.at last he suddenly stopped forcing his horse into the mechanical gallop and slid down."well, i got there!" he announced fiercely, his blue eyes still flaring, and his sturdy long legs straddling apart."where did you get to?" asked his mother."where i wanted to go," he flared back at her."that's right, son!" said uncle oscar. "don't you stop till you get there. what's the horse's name?""he doesn't have a name," said the boy."get's on without all right?" asked the uncle."well, he has different names. he was called sansovino last week.""sansovino, eh? won the ascot. how did you know this name?""he always talks about horse-races with bassett," said joan.the uncle was delighted to find that his small nephew was posted with all the racing news. bassett, the young gardener, who had been wounded in the left foot in the war and had got his present job through oscar cresswell, whose batman he had been, was a perfect blade of the 'turf'. he lived in the racing events, and the small boy lived with him.oscar cresswell got it all from bassett."master paul comes and asks me, so i can't do more than tell him, sir," said bassett, his face terribly serious, as if he were speaking of religious matters."and does he ever put anything on a horse he fancies?""well - i don't want to give him away - he's a young sport, a fine sport, sir. would you mind asking him himself? he sort of takes a pleasure in it, and perhaps he'd feel i was giving him away, sir, if you don't mind.bassett was serious as a church.the uncle went back to his nephew and took him off for a ride in the car."say, paul, old man, do you ever put anything on a horse?" the uncle asked.the boy watched the handsome man closely."why, do you think i oughtn't to?" he parried."not a bit of it! i thought perhaps you might give me a tip for the lincoln."the car sped on into the country, going down to uncle oscar's place in hampshire."honour bright?" said the nephew."honour bright, son!" said the uncle."well, then, daffodil.""daffodil! i doubt it, sonny. what about mirza?""i only know the winner," said the boy. "that's daffodil.""daffodil, eh?"there was a pause. daffodil was an obscure horse comparatively."uncle!""yes, son?""you won't let it go any further, will you? i promised bassett.""bassett be damned, old man! what's he got to do with it?""we're partners. we've been partners from the first. uncle, he lent me my first five shillings, which i lost. i promised him, honour bright, it was only between me and him; only you gave me that ten-shilling note i started winning with, so i thought you were lucky. you won't let it go any further, will you?"the boy gazed at his uncle from those big, hot, blue eyes, set rather close together. the uncle stirred and laughed uneasily."right you are, son! i'll keep your tip private. how much are you putting on him?""all except twenty pounds," said the boy. "i keep that in reserve."the uncle thought it a good joke."you keep twenty pounds in reserve, do you, you young romancer? what are you betting, then?""i'm betting three hundred," said the boy gravely. "but it's between you and me, uncle oscar! honour bright?""it's between you and me all right, you young nat gould," he said, laughing. "but where's your three hundred?""bassett keeps it for me. we're partner's.""you are, are you! and what is bassett putting on daffodil?""he won't go quite as high as i do, i expect. perhaps he'll go a hundred and fifty.""what, pennies?" laughed the uncle."pounds," said the child, with a surprised look at his uncle. "bassett keeps a bigger reserve than i do."between wonder and amusement uncle oscar was silent. he pursued the matter no further, but he determined to take his nephew with him to the lincoln races."now, son," he said, "i'm putting twenty on mirza, and i'll put five on for you on any horse you fancy. what's your pick?""daffodil, uncle.""no, not the fiver on daffodil!""i should if it was my own fiver," said the child."good! good! right you are! a fiver for me and a fiver for you on daffodil."the child had never been to a race-meeting before, and his eyes were blue fire. he pursed his mouth tight and watched. a frenchman just in front had put his money on lancelot. wild with excitement, he flayed his arms up and down, yelling "lancelot!, lancelot!" in his french accent.daffodil came in first, lancelot second, mirza third. the child, flushed and with eyes blazing, was curiously serene. his uncle brought him four five-pound notes, four to one."what am i to do with these?" he cried, waving them before the boys eyes."i suppose we'll talk to bassett," said the boy. "i expect i have fifteen hundred now; and twenty in reserve; and this twenty."his uncle studied him for some moments."look here, son!" he said. "you're not serious about bassett and that fifteen hundred, are you?""yes, i am. but it's between you and me, uncle. honour bright?""honour bright all right, son! but i must talk to bassett.""if you'd like to be a partner, uncle, with bassett and me, we could all be partners. only, you'd have to promise, honour bright, uncle, not to let it go beyond us three. bassett and i are lucky, and you must be lucky, because it was your ten shillings i started winning with ..."uncle oscar took both bassett and paul into richmond park for an afternoon, and there they talked."it's like this, you see, sir," bassett said. "master paul would get me talking about racing events, spinning yarns, you know, sir. and he was always keen on knowing if i'd made or if i'd lost. it's about a year since, now, that i put five shillings on blush of dawn for him: and we lost. then the luck turned, with that ten shillings he had from you: that we put on singhalese. and since that time, it's been pretty steady, all things considering. what do you say, master paul?""we're all right when we're sure," said paul. "it's when we're not quite sure that we go down.""oh, but we're careful then," said bassett."but when are you sure?" smiled uncle oscar."it's master paul, sir," said bassett in a secret, religious voice. "it's as if he had it from heaven. like daffodil, now, for the lincoln. that was as sure as eggs.""did you put anything on daffodil?" asked oscar cresswell."yes, sir, i made my bit.""and my nephew?"bassett was obstinately silent, looking at paul."i made twelve hundred, didn't i, bassett? i told uncle i was putting three hundred on daffodil.""that's right," said bassett, nodding."but where's the money?" asked the uncle."i keep it safe locked up, sir. master paul he can have it any minute he likes to ask for it.""what, fifteen hundred pounds?""and twenty! and forty, that is, with the twenty he made on the course.""it's amazing!" said the uncle."if master paul offers you to be partners, sir, i would, if i were you: if you'll excuse me," said bassett.oscar cresswell thought about it."i'll see the money," he said.they drove home again, and, sure enough, bassett came round to the garden-house with fifteen hundred pounds in notes. the twenty pounds reserve was left with joe glee, in the turf commission deposit."you see, it's all right, uncle, when i'm sure! then we go strong, for all we're worth, don't we, bassett?""we do that, master paul.""and when are you sure?" said the uncle, laughing."oh, well, sometimes i'm absolutely sure, like about daffodil," said the boy; "and sometimes i have an idea; and sometimes i haven't even an idea, have i, bassett? then we're careful, because we mostly go down.""you do, do you! and when you're sure, like about daffodil, what makes you sure, sonny?""oh, well, i don't know," said the boy uneasily. "i'm sure, you know, uncle; that's all.""it's as if he had it from heaven, sir," bassett reiterated."i should say so!" said the uncle.but he became a partner. and when the leger was coming on paul was 'sure' about lively spark, which was a quite inconsiderable horse. the boy insisted on putting a thousand on the horse, bassett went for five hundred, and oscar cresswell two hundred. lively spark came in first, and the betting had been ten to one against him. paul had made ten thousand."you see," he said. "i was absolutely sure of him."even oscar cresswell had cleared two thousand."look here, son," he said, "this sort of thing makes me nervous.""it needn't, uncle! perhaps i shan't be sure again for a long time.""but what are you going to do with your money?" asked the uncle."of course," said the boy, "i started it for mother. she said she had no luck, because father is unlucky, so i thought if i was lucky, it might stop whispering.""what might stop whispering?""our house. i hate our house for whispering.""what does it whisper?""why - why" - the boy fidgeted - "why, i don't know. but it's always short of money, you know, uncle.""i know it, son, i know it.""you know people send mother writs, don't you, uncle?""i'm afraid i do," said the uncle."and then the house whispers, like people laughing at you behind your back. it's awful, that is! i thought if i was lucky -""you might stop it," added the uncle.the boy watched him with big blue eyes, that had an uncanny cold fire in them, and he said never a word."well, then!" said the uncle. "what are we doing?""i shouldn't like mother to know i was lucky," said the boy."why not, son?""she'd stop me.""i don't think she would.""oh!" - and the boy writhed in an odd way - "i don't want her to know, uncle.""all right, son! we'll manage it without her knowing."they managed it very easily. paul, at the other's suggestion, handed over five thousand pounds to his uncle, who deposited it with the family lawyer, who was then to inform paul's mother that a relative had put five thousand pounds into his hands, which sum was to be paid out a thousand pounds at a time, on the mother's birthday, for the next five years."so she'll have a birthday present of a thousand pounds for five successive years," said uncle oscar. "i hope it won't make it all the harder for her later."paul's mother had her birthday in november. the house had been 'whispering' worse than ever lately, and, even in spite of his luck, paul could not bear up against it. he was very anxious to see the effect of the birthday letter, telling his mother about the thousand pounds.when there were no visitors, paul now took his meals with his parents, as he was beyond the nursery control. his mother went into town nearly every day. she had discovered that she had an odd knack of sketching furs and dress materials, so she worked secretly in the studio of a friend who was the chief 'artist' for the leading drapers. she drew the figures of ladies in furs and ladies in silk and sequins for the newspaper advertisements. this young woman artist earned several thousand pounds a year, but paul's mother only made several hundreds, and she was again dissatisfied. she so wanted to be first in something, and she did not succeed, even in making sketches for drapery advertisements.she was down to breakfast on the morning of her birthday. paul watched her face as she read her letters. he knew the lawyer's letter. as his mother read it, her face hardened and became more expressionless. then a cold, determined look came on her mouth. she hid the letter under the pile of others, and said not a word about it."didn't you have anything nice in the post for your birthday, mother?" said paul."quite moderately nice," she said, her voice cold and hard and absent.she went away to town without saying more.but in the afternoon uncle oscar appeared. he said paul's mother had had a long interview with the lawyer, asking if the whole five thousand could not be advanced at once, as she was in debt."what do you think, uncle?" said the boy."i leave it to you, son.""oh, let her have it, then! we can get some more with the other," said the boy."a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, laddie!" said uncle oscar."but i'm sure to know for the grand national; or the lincolnshire; or else the derby. i'm sure to know for one of them," said paul.so uncle oscar signed the agreement, and paul's mother touched the whole five thousand. then something very curious happened. the voices in the house suddenly went mad, like a chorus of frogs on a spring evening. there were certain new furnishings, and paul had a tutor. he was really going to eton, his father's school, in the following autumn. there were flowers in the winter, and a blossoming of the luxury paul's mother had been used to. and yet the voices in the house, behind the sprays of mimosa and almond-blossom, and from under the piles of iridescent cushions, simply trilled and screamed in a sort of ecstasy: "there must be more money! oh-h-h; there must be more money. oh, now, now-w! now-w-w - there must be more money! - more than ever! more than ever!"it frightened paul terribly. he studied away at his latin and greek with his tutor. but his intense hours were spent with bassett. the grand national had gone by: he had not 'known', and had lost a hundred pounds. summer was at hand. he was in agony for the lincoln. but even for the lincoln he didn't 'know', and he lost fifty pounds. he became wild-eyed and strange, as if something were going to explode in him."let it alone, son! don't you bother about it!" urged uncle oscar. but it was as if the boy couldn't really hear what his uncle was saying."i've got to know for the derby! i've got to know for the derby!" the child reiterated, his big blue eyes blazing with a sort of madness.his mother noticed how overwrought he was."you'd better go to the seaside.  wouldn't you like to go now to the seaside, instead of waiting? i think you'd better," she said, looking down at him anxiously, her heart curiously heavy because of him.but the child lifted his uncanny blue eyes."i couldn't possibly go before the derby, mother!" he said. "i couldn't possibly!""why not?" she said, her voice becoming heavy when she was opposed. "why not? you can still go from the seaside to see the derby with your uncle oscar, if that that's what you wish. no need for you to wait here. besides, i think you care too much about these races. it's a bad sign. my family has been a gambling family, and you won't know till you grow up how much damage it has done. but it has done damage. i shall have to send bassett away, and ask uncle oscar not to talk racing to you, unless you promise to be reasonable about it: go away to the seaside and forget it. you're all nerves!""i'll do what you like, mother, so long as you don't send me away till after the derby," the boy said."send you away from where? just from this house?""yes," he said, gazing at her."why, you curious child, what makes you care about this house so much, suddenly? i never knew you loved it."he gazed at her without speaking. he had a secret within a secret, something he had not divulged, even to bassett or to his uncle oscar.but his mother, after standing undecided and a little bit sullen for some moments, said: "very well, then! don't go to the seaside till after the derby, if you don't wish it. but promise me you won't think so much about horse-racing and events as you call them!""oh no," said the boy casually. "i won't think much about them, mother. you needn't worry. i wouldn't worry, mother, if i were you.""if you were me and i were you," said his mother, "i wonder what we should do!""but you know you needn't worry, mother, don't you?" the boy repeated."i should be awfully glad to know it," she said wearily."oh, well, you can, you know. i mean, you ought to know you needn't worry," he insisted."ought i? then i'll see about it," she said.paul's secret of secrets was his wooden horse, that which had no name. since he was emancipated from a nurse and a nursery-governess, he had had his rocking-horse removed to his own bedroom at the top of the house."surely you're too big for a rocking-horse!" his mother had remonstrated."well, you see, mother, till i can have a real horse, i like to have some sort of animal about," had been his quaint answer."do you feel he keeps you company?" she laughed."oh yes! he's very good, he always keeps me company, when i'm there," said paul.so the horse, rather shabby, stood in an arrested prance in the boy's bedroom.the derby was drawing near, and the boy grew more and more tense. he hardly heard what was spoken to him, he was very frail, and his eyes were really uncanny. his mother had sudden strange seizures of uneasiness about him. sometimes, for half an hour, she would feel a sudden anxiety about him that was almost anguish. she wanted to rush to him at once, and know he was safe.two nights before the derby, she was at a big party in town, when one of her rushes of anxiety about her boy, her first-born, gripped her heart till she could hardly speak. she fought with the feeling, might and main, for she believed in common sense. but it was too strong. she had to leave the dance and go downstairs to telephone to the country. the children's nursery-governess was terribly surprised and startled at being rung up in the night."are the children all right, miss wilmot?""oh yes, they are quite all right.""master paul? is he all right?""he went to bed as right as a trivet. shall i run up and look at him?""no," said paul's mother reluctantly. "no! don't trouble. it's all right. don't sit up. we shall be home fairly soon." she did not want her son's privacy intruded upon."very good," said the governess.it was about one o'clock when paul's mother and father drove up to their house. all was still. paul's mother went to her room and slipped off her white fur cloak. she had told her maid not to wait up for her. she heard her husband downstairs, mixing a whisky and soda.and then, because of the strange anxiety at her heart, she stole upstairs to her son's room. noiselessly she went along the upper corridor. was there a faint noise? what was it?she stood, with arrested muscles, outside his door, listening. there was a strange, heavy, and yet not loud noise. her heart stood still. it was a soundless noise, yet rushing and powerful. something huge, in violent, hushed motion. what was it? what in god's name was it? she ought to know. she felt that she knew the noise. she knew what it was.yet she could not place it. she couldn't say what it was. and on and on it went, like a madness.softly, frozen with anxiety and fear, she turned the door-handle.the room was dark. yet in the space near the window, she heard and saw something plunging to and fro. she gazed in fear and amazement.then suddenly she switched on the light, and saw her son, in his green pyjamas, madly surging on the rocking-horse. the blaze of light suddenly lit him up, as he urged the wooden horse, and lit her up, as she stood, blonde, in her dress of pale green and crystal, in the doorway."paul!" she cried. "whatever are you doing?""it's malabar!" he screamed in a powerful, strange voice. "it's malabar!"his eyes blazed at her for one strange and senseless second, as he ceased urging his wooden horse. then he fell with a crash to the ground, and she, all her tormented motherhood flooding upon her, rushed to gather him up.but he was unconscious, and unconscious he remained, with some brain-fever. he talked and tossed, and his mother sat stonily by his side."malabar! it's malabar! bassett, bassett, i know! it's malabar!"so the child cried, trying to get up and urge the rocking-horse that gave him his inspiration."what does he mean by malabar?" asked the heart-frozen mother."i don't know," said the father stonily."what does he mean by malabar?" she asked her brother oscar."it's one of the horses running for the derby," was the answer.and, in spite of himself, oscar cresswell spoke to bassett, and himself put a thousand on malabar: at fourteen to one.the third day of the illness was critical: they were waiting for a change. the boy, with his rather long, curly hair, was tossing ceaselessly on the pillow. he neither slept nor regained consciousness, and his eyes were like blue stones. his mother sat, feeling her heart had gone, turned actually into a stone.in the evening oscar cresswell did not come, but bassett sent a message, saying could he come up for one moment, just one moment? paul's mother was very angry at the intrusion, but on second thoughts she agreed. the boy was the same. perhaps bassett might bring him to consciousness.the gardener, a shortish fellow with a little brown moustache and sharp little brown eyes, tiptoed into the room, touched his imaginary cap to paul's mother, and stole to the bedside, staring with glittering, smallish eyes at the tossing, dying child."master paul!" he whispered. "master paul! malabar came in first all right, a clean win. i did as you told me. you've made over seventy thousand pounds, you have; you've got over eighty thousand. malabar came in all right, master paul.""malabar! malabar! did i say malabar, mother? did i say malabar? do you think i'm lucky, mother? i knew malabar, didn't i? over eighty thousand pounds! i call that lucky, don't you, mother? over eighty thousand pounds! i knew, didn't i know i knew? malabar came in all right. if i ride my horse till i'm sure, then i tell you, bassett, you can go as high as you like. did you go for all you were worth, bassett?""i went a thousand on it, master paul.""i never told you, mother, that if i can ride my horse, and get there, then i'm absolutely sure - oh, absolutely! mother, did i ever tell you? i am lucky!""no, you never did," said his mother.but the boy died in the night.and even as he lay dead, his mother heard her brother's voice saying to her, "my god, hester, you're eighty-odd thousand to the good, and a poor devil of a son to the bad. but, poor devil, poor devil, he's best gone out of a life where he rides his rocking-horse to find a winner."day had broken cold and gray, exceedingly cold and gray, when the man turned aside from the main yukon trail and climbed the high earth-bank, where a dim and little traveled trail led eastward through the fat spruce timberland. it was a steep bank, and he paused for breath at the top, excusing the act to himself by looking at his watch. it was nine o'clock. there was no sun nor hint of sun, though there was not a cloud in the sky. it was a clear day, and yet there seemed an intangible pall over the face of things, a subtle gloom that made the day dark, and that was due to the absence of sun. this fact did not worry the man. he was used to the lack of sun. it had been days since he had seen the sun, and he knew that a few more-days must pass before that cheerful orb, due south, would just peep above the sky-line and dip immediately from view.the man flung a look back along the way he had come. the yukon lay a mile wide and hidden under three feet of ice. on top of this ice were as many feet of snow. it was all pure white, rolling in gentle, undulations where the ice jams of the freeze-up had formed. north and south, as far as his eye could see, it was unbroken white, save for a dark hairline that curved and twisted from around the spruce-covered island to the south, and that curved and twisted away into the north, where it disappeared behind another spruce-covered island. this dark hair-line was the trail--the main trail--that led south five hundred miles to the chilcoot pass, dyea, and salt water; and that led north seventy miles to dawson, and still on to the north a thousand miles to nulato, and finally to st. michael on bering sea, a thousand miles and half a thousand more.but all this--the mysterious, far-reaching hair-line trail. the absence of sun from the sky, the tremendous cold, and the strangeness and weirdness of it all--made no impression on the man. it was not because he was long used to it. he was a newcomer in the land, a chechaquo, and this was his first winter. the trouble with him was that he was without imagination. he was quick and alert in the things of life, but only in the things, and not in the significances. fifty degrees below zero meant eighty-odd degrees of frost. such fact impressed him as being cold and uncomfortable, and that was all. it did not lead him to meditate upon his frailty as a creature of temperature, and upon man's frailty in general, able only to live within certain narrow limits of heat and cold; and from there on it did not lead him to the conjectural field of immortality and man's place in the universe. fifty degrees below zero stood forte bite of frost that hurt and that must be guarded against by the use of mittens, ear-flaps, warm moccasins, and thick socks. fifty degrees below zero was to him just precisely fifty degrees below zero. that there should be anything more to it than that was a thought that never entered his head.as he turned to go on, he spat speculatively. there was a sharp, explosive crackle that startled him. he spat again. and again, in the air, before it could fall to the snow, the spittle crackled. he knew that at fifty below spittle crackled on the snow, but this spittle had crackled in the air. undoubtedly it was colder than fifty below--how much colder he did not know. but the temperature did not matter. he was bound for the old claim on the left fork of henderson creek, where the boys were already. they had come over across the divide from the indian creek country, while he had come the roundabout way to take a look at the possibilities of getting out logs in the spring from the islands in the yukon. he would be in to camp by six o'clock; a bit after dark, it was true, but the boys would be there, a fire would be going, and a hot supper would be ready. as for lunch, he pressed his hand against the protruding bundle under his jacket. it was also under his shirt, wrapped up in a handkerchief and lying against the naked skin. it was the only way to keep the biscuits from freezing. he smiled agreeably to himself as he thought of those biscuits, each cut open and sopped in bacon grease, and each enclosing a generous slice of fried bacon.he plunged in among the big spruce trees. the trail was faint. a foot of snow had fallen since the last sled had passed over, and he was glad he was without a sled, traveling light. in fact, he carried nothing but the lunch wrapped in the handkerchief. he was surprised, however, at the cold. it certainly was cold, he concluded as he rubbed his numb nose and cheek-bones with his mittened hand. he was a warm-whiskered man, but the hair on his face did not protect the high cheek-bones and the eager nose that thrust itself aggressively into the frosty air.at the man's heels trotted a dog, a big native husky, the proper wolfdog, gray-coated and without any visible or temperamental difference from its brother, the wild wolf. the animal was depressed by the tremendous cold. it knew that it was no time for traveling. its instinct told it a truer tale than was told to the man by the man's judgment. in reality, it was not merely colder than fifty below zero; it was colder than sixty below, than seventy below. it was seventy-five below zero. since the freezing point is thirty-two above zero, it meant that one hundred and seven degrees of frost obtained. the dog did not know anything about thermometers. possibly in its brain there was no sharp consciousness of a condition of very cold such as was in the man's brain. but the brute had its instinct. it experienced a vague but menacing apprehension that subdued it and made it slink along at the man's heels, and that made it question eagerly every unwonted movement of the man as if expecting him to go into camp or to seek shelter somewhere and build a fire. the dog had learned fire, and it wanted fire, or else to burrow under the snow and cuddle its warmth away from the air.the frozen moisture of its breathing had settled on its fur in a fine powder of frost, and especially were its jowls, muzzle, and eyelashes whitened by its crystalled breath. the man's red beard and mustache were likewise frosted, but more solidly, the deposit taking the form of ice and increasing with every warm, moist breath he exhaled. also, the man was chewing tobacco, and the muzzle of ice held his lips so rigidly that he was unable to clear his chin when he expelled the juice. the result was that a crystal beard of the color and solidity of amber was increasing its length on his chin. if he fell down it would shatter itself, like glass, into brittle fragments. but he did not mind the appendage. it was the penalty all tobacco-chewers paid in that country, and he had been out before in two cold snaps. they had not been so cold as this, he knew, but by the spirit thermometer at sixty mile he knew they had been registered at fifty below and at fifty-five.he held on through the level stretch of woods for several miles, crossed a wide flat of rigger-heads, and dropped down a bank to the frozen bed of a small stream. this was henderson creek, and he knew he was ten miles from the forks. he looked at his watch. it was ten o'clock. he was making four miles an hour, and he calculated that he would arrive at the forks at half-past twelve. he decided to celebrate that event by eating his lunch there.the dog dropped in again at his heels, with a tail drooping discouragement, as the man swung along the creek-bed. the furrow of the old sled-trail was plainly visible, but a dozen inches of snow covered the marks of the last runners. in a month no man had come up or down that silent creek. the man held steadily on. he was not much given to thinking, and just then particularly he had nothing to think about save that he would eat lunch at-the forks and that at six o'clock he would be in camp with the boys. there was nobody to talk to; and, had there been, speech would have been impossible because of the ice-muzzle on his mouth. so he continued monotonously to chew tobacco and to increase the length of his amber beard.once in a while the thought reiterated itself that it was very cold and that he had never experienced such cold. as he walked along he rubbed his cheek-bones and nose with the back of his mittened hand. he did this automatically, now and again changing hands. but rub as he would, the instant he stopped his cheek-bones went numb, and the following instant the end of his nose went numb. he was sure to frost his cheeks; he knew that, and experienced a pang of regret that he had not devised a nose-strap of the sort bud wore in cold snaps. such a strap passed across the cheeks, as well, and saved them. but it didn't matter much, after all. what were frosted cheeks? a bit painful, that was all; they were never serious.empty as the man's mind was of thoughts, he was keenly observant, and he noticed the changes in the creek, the curves and bends and timber jams, and always he sharply noted where he placed his feet. once coming around a bend, he shied abruptly, like a startled horse, curved away from the place where he had been walking, and retreated several paces back along the trail. the creek he knew was frozen clear to the bottom,--no creek could contain water in that arctic winter,--but he knew also that there were springs that bubbled out from the hillsides and ran along under the snow and on top the ice of the creek. he knew that the coldest snaps never froze these springs, and he knew likewise their danger. they were traps. they hid pools of water under the snow that might be three inches deep, or three feet. sometimes a skin of ice, half an inch thick covered them, and in turn was covered by the snow. sometimes there were alternate layers of water and ice-skin, so that when one broke through he kept on breaking through for a while, sometimes wetting himself to the waist.that was why he had shied in such panic. he had felt the give under his feet and heard the crackle of a snow-hidden ice-skin. and to get his feet wet in such a temperature meant trouble and danger. at the very least it meant delay, for he would be forced to stop and build a fire, and under its protection to bare his feet while he dried his socks and moccasins. he stood and studied the creek-bed and its banks, and decided that the flow of water came from the right. he reflected a while, rubbing his nose and cheeks, then skirted to the left, stepping gingerly and testing the footing for each step. once clear of the danger, he took a fresh chew of tobacco and swung along at his four-mile gait.in the course of the next two hours he came upon several similar traps. usually the snow above the hidden pools had a sunken, candied appearance that advertised the danger. once again, however, he had a close call; and once, suspecting danger, he compelled the dog to go on in front. the dog did not want to go. it hung back until the man shoved it forward, and then it went quickly across the white, unbroken surface. suddenly it broke through, floundered to one side, and got away to firmer footing. it had wet its forefeet and legs, and almost immediately the water that clung to it turned to ice. it made quick efforts to lick the ice off its legs, then dropped down in the snow and began to bite out the ice that had formed between the toes. this was a matter of instinct. to permit the ice to remain would mean sore feet. it did not know this. it merely obeyed the mysterious prompting that arose from the deep crypts of its being. but the man knew, having achieved a judgment on the subject, and he removed the mitten from his right hand and helped tear out the ice-particles. he did not expose his fingers more than a minute, and was astonished at the swift numbness that smote them. it certainly was cold. he pulled on the mitten hastily, and beat the hand savagely across his chest.at twelve o'clock the day was at its brightest. yet the sun was too far south on its winter journey to clear the horizon. the bulge of the earth intervened between it and henderson creek, where the man walked under a clear sky at noon and cast no shadow. at half-past twelve, to the minute, he arrived at the forks of the creek. he was pleased at the speed he had made. if he kept it up, he would certainly be with the boys by six. he unbuttoned his jacket and shirt and drew forth his lunch. the action consumed no more than a quarter of a minute, yet in that brief moment the numbness laid hold of the exposed fingers. he did not put the mitten on, but, instead struck the fingers a dozen sharp smashes against his leg. then he sat down on a snow-covered log to eat. the sting that followed upon the striking of his fingers against his leg ceased so quickly that he was startled. he had had no chance to  take a bite of biscuit. he struck the fingers repeatedly and returned them to the mitten, baring the other hand for the purpose of eating. he tried to take a mouthful, but the ice-muzzle prevented. he had forgotten to build a fire and thaw out. he chuckled at his foolishness, and as he chuckled he noted the numbness creeping into the exposed fingers. also, he noted that the stinging which had first come to his toes when he sat down was already passing away. he wondered whether the toes were warm or numb. he moved them inside the moccasins and decided that they were numb.he pulled the mitten on hurriedly and stood up. he was a bit frightened. he stamped up and down until the stinging returned into the feet. it certainly was cold, was his thought. that man from sulphur creek had spoken the truth when telling how cold it sometimes got in the country. and he had laughed at him at the time! that showed one must not be too sure of things. there was no mistake about it, it was cold. he strode up and down, stamping his feet and threshing his arms, until reassured by the returning warmth. then he got out matches and proceeded to make a fire. from the undergrowth, where high water of the previous spring had lodged a supply of seasoned twigs, he got his firewood. working carefully from a small beginning, he soon had a roaring fire, over which he thawed the ice from his face and in the protection of which he ate his biscuits. for the moment the cold space was outwitted. the dog took satisfaction in the fire, stretching out close enough for warmth and far enough away to escape being singed.when the man had finished, be filled his pipe and took his comfortable time over a smoke. then he pulled on his mittens, settled the ear-flaps of his cap firmly about his ears, and took the creek trail up the left fork. the dog was disappointed and yearned back toward the fire. this man did not know cold. possibly all the generations of his ancestry had been ignorant of cold, of real cold, of cold one hundred and seven degrees below freezing point. but the dog knew; all its ancestry knew, and it had inherited the knowledge. and it knew that it was not good to walk abroad in such fearful cold. it was the time to lie snug in a hole in the snow and wait for a curtain of cloud to be drawn across the face of outer space whence this cold came. on the other hand, there was no keen intimacy between the dog and the man. the one was the toil-slave of the other, and the only caresses it had ever received were the caresses of the whiplash and of harsh and menacing throat-sounds that threatened the whiplash. so, the dog made no effort to communicate its apprehension to the man. it was not concerned in the welfare of the man, it was for its own sake that it yearned back toward the fire. but the man whistled, and spoke to it with the sound of whiplashes and the dog swung in at the man's heel and followed after.the man took a chew of tobacco and proceeded to start a new amber beard. also, his moist breath quickly powdered with white his mustache, eyebrows, and lashes. there did not seem to be so many springs on the left fork of the henderson, and for half an hour the man saw no signs of any. and then it happened. at a place where there were no signs, where the soft, unbroken snow seemed to advertise solidity beneath, the man broke through. it was not deep. he wet himself halfway to the knees before he floundered out to the firm crust.he was angry, and cursed his luck aloud. he had hoped to get into camp with the boys at six o'clock, and this would delay him an hour, for he would have to build a fire and dry out his foot-gear. this was imperative at that low temperature--he knew that much; and he turned aside to the bank, which he climbed. on top, tangled in the underbrush about the trunks of several small spruce trees, was a high-water deposit of dry firewood--sticks and twigs, principally, but also larger portions of seasoned branches and fine, dry, last-year's grasses. he threw down several large pieces on top of the snow. this served for a foundation and prevented the young flame from drowning itself in the snow it otherwise would melt. the flame he got by touching a match to a small shred of birch bark that he took from his pocket. this burned even more readily than paper. placing it on the foundation, he fed the young flame with wisps of dry grass and with the tiniest dry twigs.he worked slowly and carefully, keenly aware of his danger. gradually, as the flame grew stronger, he increased the size of the twigs with which he fed it. he squatted in the snow, pulling the twigs out from their entanglement in the brush and feeding directly to the flame. he knew there must be no failure. when it is seventy-five below zero, a man must not fail in his first attempt to build a fire--that is, if his feet are wet. if his feet are dry, and he fails, he can run along the trail for half a mile and restore his circulation. but the circulation of wet and freezing feet cannot be restored by running when it is seventy-five below. no matter how fast he runs, the wet feet will freeze the harder.all this the man knew. the old-timer on sulphur creek had told him about it the previous fall, and now he was appreciating the advice. already all sensation had gone out of his feet. to build the fire he had been forced to remove his mittens, and the fingers had quickly gone numb. his pace of four miles an hour had kept his heart pumping blood to the surface of his body and to all the extremities. but the instant he stopped, the action of the pump eased down. the cold of space smote the unprotected tip of the planet, and he, being on that unprotected tip, received the full force of the blow. the blood of his body recoiled before it. the blood was alive, like the dog, and like the dog it wanted to hide away and cover itself up from the fearful cold. so long as he walked four miles an hour, he pumped that blood, willy-nilly, to the surface; but now it ebbed away and sank down into the recesses of his body. the extremities were the first to feel its absence. his wet feet froze the faster, and his exposed fingers numbed the faster, though they had not yet begun to freeze. nose and cheeks were already freezing, while the skin of all his body chilled as it lost its blood.but he was safe. toes and nose and cheeks would be only touched by the frost, for the fire was beginning to burn with strength. he was feeding it with twigs the size of his finger. in another minute he would be able to feed it with branches the size of his wrist, and then he could remove his wet foot-gear, and, while it dried, he could keep his naked feet warm by the fire, rubbing them at first, of course, with snow. the fire was a success. he was safe. he remembered the advice of the old timer on sulphur creek, and smiled. the old-timer had been very serious in laying down the law that no man must travel alone in the klondike after fifty below. well, here he was; he had had the accident; he was alone; and he had saved himself. those old-timers were rather womanish, some of them, he thought. all a man had to do was to keep his head, and he was all right. any man who was a man could travel alone. but it was surprising, the rapidity with which his cheeks and nose were freezing. and he had not thought his fingers could go lifeless in so short a time. lifeless they were, for he could scarcely make them move together to grip a twig, and they seemed remote from his body and from him. when he touched a twig, he had to look and see whether or not he had hold of it. the wires were pretty well down between him and his finger-ends.all of which counted for little. there was the fire, snapping and crackling and promising life with every dancing flame. he started to untie his moccasins. they were coated with ice; the thick german socks were like sheaths of iron halfway to the knees; and the moccasin strings were like rods of steel all twisted and knotted as by some conflagration. for a moment he tugged with his numb fingers, then, realizing the folly of it, he drew his sheath-knife.but before he could cut the strings, it happened. it was his own fault or, rather, his mistake. he should not have built the fire under the spruce tree. he should have built it in the open. but it had been easier to pull the twigs from the brush and drop them directly on the fire. now the tree under which he had done this carried a weight of snow on its boughs. no wind had blown for weeks, and each bough was fully freighted. each time he had pulled a twig he had communicated a slight agitation to the tree--an imperceptible agitation, so far as he was concerned, but an agitation sufficient to bring about the disaster. high up in the tree one bough capsized its load of snow. this fell on the boughs beneath, capsizing them. this process continued, spreading out and involving the whole tree. it grew like an avalanche, and it descended without warning upon the man and the fire, and the fire was blotted out! where it had burned was a mantle of fresh and disordered snow.the man was shocked. it was as though he had just heard his own sentence of death. for a moment he sat and stared at the spot where the fire had been. then he grew very calm. perhaps the old-timer on sulphur creek was right. if he had only had a trail-mate he would have been in no danger now. the trail-mate could have built the fire. well, it was up to him to build the fire over again, and this second time there must be no failure. even if he succeeded, he would most likely lose some toes. his feet must be badly frozen by now, and there would be some time before the second fire was ready.such were his thoughts, but he did not sit and think them. he was busy all the time they were passing through his mind. he made a new foundation for a fire, this time in the open, where no treacherous tree could blot it out. next, he gathered dry grasses and tiny twigs from the high-water flotsam. he could not bring his fingers together to pull them out, but he was able to gather them by the handful. in this way he got many rotten twigs and bits of green moss that were undesirable, but it was the best he could do. he worked methodically, even collecting an armful of the larger branches to be used later when the fire gathered strength. and all the while the dog sat and watched him, a certain yearning wistfulness in its eyes, for it looked upon him as the fire-provider, and the fire was slow in coming.when all was ready, the man reached in his pocket for a second piece of birch bark. he knew the bark was there, and, though he could not feel it with his fingers, he could hear its crisp rustling as he fumbled for it. try as he would, he could not clutch hold of it. and all the time in his consciousness, was the knowledge that each instant his feet were freezing. this thought tended to put him in a panic, but he fought against it and kept calm. he pulled on his mittens with his teeth, and threshed his arms back and forth, beating his hands with all his might against his sides. he did this sitting down, and he stood up to do it; and all the while the dog sat in the snow, its wolf-brush of a tail curled around warmly over its forefeet, its sharp wolf-ears pricked forward intently as it watched the man. and the man, as he beat and threshed with his arms and hands, felt a great surge of envy as he regarded the creature that was warm ant secure in its natural covering.after a time he was aware of the first far-away signals of sensation in his beaten fingers. the faint tingling grew stronger till it evolved into a stinging ache that was excruciating, but which the man hailed with satisfaction. he stripped the mitten from his right hand and fetched forth the birch bark. the exposed fingers were quickly going numb again. next he brought out his bunch of sulphur matches. but the tremendous cold had already driven the life out of his fingers. in his effort to separate one match from the others, the whole bunch fell in the snow. he tried to pick it out of the snow, but failed. the dead fingers could neither touch nor clutch. he was very careful. he drove the thought of his freezing feet, and nose, and cheeks, out of his mind, devoting his whole soul to the matches. he watched, using the sense of vision in place of that of touch, and when he saw his fingers on each side the bunch, he closed them--that is, he willed to close them, for the wires were down, and the fingers did not obey. he pulled the mitten on the right hand and beat it fiercely against his knee. then. with both mittened hands, he scooped the bunch of matches, along with much snow, into his lap. yet he was no better off.after some manipulation he managed to get the bunch between the heels of his mittened hands. in this fashion he carried it to his mouth. the ice crackled and snapped when by a violent effort he opened his mouth. he drew the lower jaw in, curled the upper lip out of the way, and scraped the bunch with his upper teeth in order to separate a match. he succeeded in getting one, which he dropped on his lap. he was no better off. he could not pick it up. then he devised a way. he picked it up in his teeth and scratched it on his leg. twenty times he scratched before he succeeded in lighting it. as it flamed he held it with his teeth to the birch bark. but the burning brimstone went up his nostrils and into his lungs, causing him to cough spasmodically. the match fell into the snow and went out.the old-timer at sulphur creek was right, he thought in the moment of controlled despair that ensued after fifty below, a man should travel with a partner. he beat his hands, but failed in exciting any sensation. suddenly he bared both hands, removing the mittens with his teeth. he caught the whole bunch between the heels of his hands. his arm muscles not being frozen enabled him to press the hand-heels tightly against the matches. then he scratched the bunch along his leg. it flared into flame, seventy sulphur matches at once! there was no wind to blow them out. he kept his head to one side to escape the strangling fumes, and held the blazing bunch to the birth bark. as he so held it, he became aware of sensation in his hand. his flesh was burning. he could smell it. deep down below the surface he could feel it. the sensation developed into pain that grew acute. and still he endured, it holding the flame of the matches clumsily to the bark that would not light readily because his own burning hands were in the way, absorbing most of the flame.at last, when he could endure no more, he jerked his hands apart. the blazing matches fell sizzling into the snow, but the birch bark was alight. he began laying dry grasses and the tiniest twigs on the flame. he could not pick and choose, for he had to lift the fuel between the heels of his hands. small pieces of rotten wood and green moss clung to the twigs, and he bit them off as well as he could with his teeth. he cherished the flame carefully and awkwardly. it meant life, and it must not perish. the withdrawal of blood from the surface of his body now made him begin to shiver, and he grew more awkward. a large piece of green moss fell squarely on the little fire. he tried to poke it out with his fingers, but his shivering frame made him poke too far and he disrupted the nucleus of the little fire, the burning grasses and tiny twigs separating and scattering. he tried to poke them together again, but in spite of the tenseness of the effort, his shivering got away with him, and the twigs were hopelessly scattered. each twig gushed a puff of smoke and went out. the fire-provider had failed. as he looked apathetically about him, his eyes chanced on the dog, sitting across the ruins of the fire from him, in the snow, making restless, hunching movements, slightly lifting one forefoot and then the other, shifting its weight back and forth on them with wistful eagerness.the sight of the dog put a wild idea into his head. he remembered the tale of the man, caught in a blizzard, who killed a steer and crawled inside the carcass, and so was saved. he would kill the dog and bury his hands in the warm body until the numbness went out of them. then he could build another fire. he spoke to the dog, calling it to him; but in his voice was a strange note of fear that frightened the animal, who had never known the man to speak in such a way before. something was the matter, and its suspicious nature sensed danger--it knew not what danger, but somewhere, somehow, in its brain arose an apprehension of the man. it flattened its ears down at the sound of the man's voice, and its restless, hunching movements and the liftings and shiftings of its forefeet became more pronounced; but it would not come to the man. he got on his hands and knees and crawled toward the dog. this unusual posture again excited suspicion, and the animal sidled mincingly away.the man sat up in the snow for a moment and struggled for calmness. then he pulled on his mittens, by means of his teeth, and got upon his feet. he glanced down at first in order to assure himself that he was really standing up, for the absence of sensation in his feet left him unrelated to the earth. his erect position in itself started to drive the webs of suspicion from the dog's mind; and when he spoke peremptorily, with the sound of whiplashes in his voice, the dog rendered its customary allegiance and came to him. as it came within reaching distance, the man lost his control. his arms flashed out to the dog, and he experienced genuine surprise when he discovered that his hands could not clutch, that there was neither bend nor feeling in the fingers. he had forgotten for the moment that they were frozen and that they were freezing more and more. all this happened quickly, and before the animal could get away, he encircled its body with his arms. he sat down in the snow, and in this fashion held the dog, while it snarled and whined and struggled.but it was all he could do, hold its body encircled in his arms and sit there. he realized that he could not kill the dog. there was no way to do it. with his helpless hands he could neither draw nor hold his sheath knife nor throttle the animal. he released it, and it plunged wildly away, with tail between its  legs, and still snarling. it halted forty feet away and surveyed him curiously, with ears sharply pricked forward. the man looked down at his hands in order to locate them, and found them hanging on the ends of his arms. it struck him as curious that one should have to use his eyes in order to find out where his hands were. he began threshing his arms back and forth, beating the mittened hands against his sides. he did this for five minutes, violently,  and his heart pumped enough blood up to the surface to put a stop to his shivering. but no sensation was aroused in the hands. he had an impression that they hung like weights on the ends of his arms, but when he tried to run the impression down, he could not find it.a certain fear of death, dull and oppressive, came to him. this fear quickly became poignant as he realized that it was no longer a mere matter of freezing his fingers and toes, or of losing his hands and feet, but that it was a matter of life and death with the chances against him. this threw him into a panic, and he turned and ran up the creek-bed along the old, dim trail. the dog joined in behind and kept up with him. he ran blindly, without intention, in fear such as he had never known in his life. slowly, as he plowed and floundered through the snow, he began to see things again, the banks of the creek, the old timber-jams, the leafless aspens, and the sky. the running made him feel better. he did not shiver. maybe, if he ran on, his feet would thaw out; and, anyway, if he ran far enough, he would reach camp and the boys. without doubt he would lose some fingers and toes and some of his face; but the boys would take care of him, and save the rest of him when he got there. and at the same time there was another thought in his mind that said he would never get to the camp and the boys; that it was too many miles away, that the freezing had too great a start on him, and that he would soon be stiff and dead. this thought he kept in the background and refused to consider. sometimes it pushed itself forward and demanded to be heard, but he thrust it back and strove to think of other things.it struck him as curious that he could run at all on feet so frozen that he could not feel them when they struck the earth and took the weigh of his body. he seemed to himself to skim along above the surface, and to have no connection with the earth. somewhere he had once seen a winged mercury, and he wondered if mercury felt as he felt when skimming over the earth.his theory of running until he reached camp and the boys had one flaw in it: he lacked the endurance. several times he stumbled, and finally he tottered, crumpled up, and fell. when he tried to rise, he failed. he must sit and rest, he decided, and next time he would merely walk and keep on going. as he sat and regained his breath, he noted that he was feeling quite warm and comfortable. he was not shivering, and it even seemed that a warm glow had come to his chest and trunk. and yet, when he touched his nose or cheeks, there was no sensation. running would not thaw them out. nor would it thaw out his hands and feet. then the thought came to him that the frozen portions of his body must be extending. he tried to keep this thought down, to forget it, to think of something else; he was aware of the panicky feeling that it caused, and he was afraid of the panic. but the thought asserted itself, and persisted, until it produced a vision of his body totally frozen. this was too much, and he made another wild run along the trail. once he slowed down to a walk, but the thought of the freezing extending itself made him run again.and all the time the dog ran with him, at his heels. when he fell down a second time, it curled its tail over its forefeet and sat in front of him, facing him, curiously eager and intent. the warmth and security of the animal angered him, and he cursed it till it flattened down its ears appealingly. this time the shivering came more quickly upon the man. he was losing in his battle with the frost. it was creeping into his body from all sides. the thought of it drove him on, but he ran no more than a hundred feet, when he staggered and pitched headlong. it was his last panic. when he had recovered his breath and control, he sat up and entertained in his mind the conception of meeting death with dignity. however, the conception did not come to him in such terms. his idea of it was that he had been making a fool of himself, running around like a chicken with its head cut off--such was the simile that occurred to him. well, he was bound to freeze anyway, and he might as well take it decently. with this new-found peace of mind came the first glimmerings of drowsiness. a good idea, he thought, to sleep off to death. it was like salting an anaesthetic. freezing was not so bad as people thought. there were lots worse ways to die.he pictured the boys finding his body next day. suddenly he found himself with them, coming along the trail and looking for himself. and, still with them, he came around a turn in the trail and found himself lying in the snow. he did not belong with himself any more, for even then he was out of himself, standing with the boys and looking at himself in the snow. it certainly was cold, was his thought. when he got back to the states he could tell the folks what real cold was. he drifted on from this to a vision of the old-timer on sulphur creek. he could see him quite clearly, warm and comfortable, and smoking a pipe."you were right, old hoss; you were right," the man mumbled to the old-timer of sulphur creek.then the man drowsed off into what seemed to him the most comfortable and satisfying sleep he had ever known. the dog sat facing him and waiting. the brief day drew to a close in a long, slow twilight. there were no signs of a fire to be made, and, besides, never in the dog's experience had it known a man to sit like that in the snow and make no fire. as the twilight drew on, its eager yearning for the fire mastered it, and with a great lifting and shifting of forefeet, it whined softly, then flattened its ears down in anticipation of being chidden by the man. but the man remained silent. later, the dog whined loudly. and still later it crept close to the man and caught the scent of death. this made the animal bristle and back away. a little longer it delayed, howling under the stars that leaped and danced and shone brightly in the cold sky. then it turned and trotted up the trail in the direction of the camp it knew, where were the other food-providers and fire-providers.with the last morsel of bread tom king wiped his plate clean of the last particle of flour gravy and chewed the resulting mouthful in a slow and meditative way. when he arose from the table, he was oppressed by the feeling that he was distinctly hungry. yet he alone had eaten. the two children in the other room had been sent early to bed in order that in sleep they might forget they had gone supperless. his wife had touched nothing, and had sat silently and watched him with solicitous eyes. she was a thin, worn woman of the working-class, though signs of an earlier prettiness were not wanting in her face. the flour for the gravy she had borrowed from the neighbour across the hall the last two ha'pennies had gone to buy the bread.he sat down by the window on a rickety chair that protested under his weight, and quite mechanically he put his pipe in his mouth and dipped into the side pocket of his coat. the absence of any tobacco made him aware of his action, and, with a scowl for his forgetfulness, he put the pipe away. his movements were slow, almost hulking, as though he were burdened by the heavy weight of his muscles. he was a solid-bodied, stolid-looking man, and his appearance did not suffer from being overprepossessing. his rough clothes were old and slouchy. the uppers of his shoes were too weak to carry the heavy re-soling that was itself of no recent date. and his cotton shirt, a cheap, two shilling affair, showed a frayed collar and ineradicable paint stains.but it was tom king's face that advertised him unmistakably for what he was. it was the face of a typical prize-fighter; of one who had put in long years of service in the squared ring and, by that means, developed and emphasized all the marks of the fighting beast. it was distinctly a lowering countenance, and, that no feature of it might escape notice, it was clean-shaven. the lips were shapeless and constituted a mouth harsh to excess, that was like a gash in his face. the jaw was aggressive, brutal, heavy. the eyes, slow of movement and heavy-lidded, were almost expressionless under the shaggy, indrawn brows. sheer animal that he was, the eyes were the most animal-like feature about him. they were sleepy, lion-like--the eyes of a fighting animal. the forehead slanted quickly back to the hair, which, clipped close, showed every bump of a villainous- looking head. a nose twice broken and moulded variously by countless blows, and a cauliflower ear, permanently swollen and distorted to twice its size, completed his adornment, while the beard, fresh-shaven as it was, sprouted in the skin and gave the face a blue-black stain.altogether, it was the face of a man to be afraid of in a dark alley or lonely place. and yet tom king was not a criminal, nor had he ever done anything criminal. outside of brawls, common to his walk in life, he had harmed no one. nor had he ever been known to pick a quarrel. he was a professional, and all the fighting brutishness of him was reserved for his professional appearances. outside the ring he was slow-going, easy- natured, and, in his younger days, when money was flush, too open-handed for his own good. he bore no grudges and had few enemies. fighting was a business with him. in the ring he struck to hurt, struck to maim, struck to destroy; but there was no animus in it. it was a plain business proposition. audiences assembled and paid for the spectacle of men knocking each other out. the winner took the big end of the purse. when tom king faced the woolloomoolloo gouger, twenty years before, he knew that the gouger's jaw was only four months healed after having been broken in a newcastle bout. and he had played for that jaw and broken it again in the ninth round, not because he bore the gouger any ill-will, but because that was the surest way to put the gouger out and win the big end of the purse. nor had the gouger borne him any ill-will for it. it was the game, and both knew the game and played it.tom king had never been a talker, and he sat by the window, morosely silent, staring at his hands. the veins stood out on the backs of the hands, large and swollen; and the knuckles, smashed and battered and malformed, testified to the use to which they had been put. he had never heard that a man's life was the life of his arteries, but well he knew the meaning of those big upstanding veins. his heart had pumped too much blood through them at top pressure. they no longer did the work. he had stretched the elasticity out of them, and with their distension had passed his endurance. he tired easily now. no longer could he do a fast twenty rounds, hammer and tongs, fight, fight, fight, from gong to gong, with fierce rally on top of fierce rally, beaten to the ropes and in turn beating his opponent to the ropes, and rallying fiercest and fastest of all in that last, twentieth round, with the house on its feet and yelling, himself rushing, striking, ducking, raining showers of blows upon showers of blows and receiving showers of blows in return, and all the time the heart faithfully pumping the surging blood through the adequate veins. the veins, swollen at the time, had always shrunk down again, though each time, imperceptibly at first, not quite--remaining just a trifle larger than before. he stared at them and at his battered knuckles, and, for the moment, caught a vision of the youthful excellence of those hands before the first knuckle had been smashed on the head of benny jones, otherwise known as the welsh terror.the impression of his hunger came back on him."blimey, but couldn't i go a piece of steak!" he muttered aloud, clenching his huge fists and spitting out a smothered oath."i tried both burke's an' sawley's," his wife said half apologetically."an' they wouldn't?" he demanded."not a ha'penny. burke said--" she faltered."g'wan! wot'd he say?""as how 'e was thinkin' sandel ud do ye to-night, an' as how yer score was comfortable big as it was."tom king grunted, but did not reply. he was busy thinking of the bull terrier he had kept in his younger days to which he had fed steaks without end. burke would have given him credit for a thousand steaks--then. but times had changed. tom king was getting old; and old men, fighting before second-rate clubs, couldn't expect to run bills of any size with the tradesmen.he had got up in the morning with a longing for a piece of steak, and the longing had not abated. he had not had a fair training for this fight. it was a drought year in australia, times were hard, and even the most irregular work was difficult to find. he had had no sparring partner, and his food had not been of the best nor always sufficient. he had done a few days' navvy work when he could get it, and he had run around the domain in the early mornings to get his legs in shape. but it was hard, training without a partner and with a wife and two kiddies that must be fed. credit with the tradesmen had undergone very slight expansion when he was matched with sandel. the secretary of the gayety club had advanced him three pounds--the loser's end of the purse--and beyond that had refused to go. now and again he had managed to borrow a few shillings from old pals, who would have lent more only that it was a drought year and they were hard put themselves. no--and there was no use in disguising the fact--his training had not been satisfactory. he should have had better food and no worries. besides, when a man is forty, it is harder to get into condition than when he is twenty."what time is it, lizzie?" he asked.his wife went across the hall to inquire, and came back."quarter before eight.""they'll be startin' the first bout in a few minutes," he said. "only a try-out. then there's a four-round spar 'tween dealer wells an' gridley, an' a ten-round go 'tween starlight an' some sailor bloke. i don't come on for over an hour."at the end of another silent ten minutes, he rose to his feet."truth is, lizzie, i ain't had proper trainin'."he reached for his hat and started for the door. he did not offer to kiss her--he never did on going out--but on this night she dared to kiss him, throwing her arms around him and compelling him to bend down to her face. she looked quite small against the massive bulk of the man."good luck, tom," she said. "you gotter do 'im.""ay, i gotter do 'im," he repeated. "that's all there is to it. i jus' gotter do 'im."he laughed with an attempt at heartiness, while she pressed more closely against him. across her shoulders he looked around the bare room. it was all he had in the world, with the rent overdue, and her and the kiddies. and he was leaving it to go out into the night to get meat for his mate and cubs--not like a modern working-man going to his machine grind, but in the old, primitive, royal, animal way, by fighting for it."i gotter do 'im," he repeated, this time a hint of desperation in his voice. "if it's a win, it's thirty quid--an' i can pay all that's owin', with a lump o' money left over. if it's a lose, i get naught--not even a penny for me to ride home on the tram. the secretary's give all that's comin' from a loser's end. good-bye, old woman. i'll come straight home if it's a win.""an' i'll be waitin' up," she called to him along the hall.it was full two miles to the gayety, and as he walked along he remembered how in his palmy days--he had once been the heavyweight champion of new south wales--he would have ridden in a cab to the fight, and how, most likely, some heavy backer would have paid for the cab and ridden with him. there were tommy burns and that yankee nigger, jack johnson--they rode about in motor-cars. and he walked! and, as any man knew, a hard two miles was not the best preliminary to a fight. he was an old un, and the world did not wag well with old uns. he was good for nothing now except navvy work, and his broken nose and swollen ear were against him even in that. he found himself wishing that he had learned a trade. it would have been better in the long run. but no one had told him, and he knew, deep down in his heart, that he would not have listened if they had. it had been so easy. big money--sharp, glorious fights--periods of rest and loafing in between--a following of eager flatterers, the slaps on the back, the shakes of the hand, the toffs glad to buy him a drink for the privilege of five minutes' talk--and the glory of it, the yelling houses, the whirlwind finish, the referee's "king wins!" and his name in the sporting columns next day.those had been times! but he realized now, in his slow, ruminating way, that it was the old uns he had been putting away. he was youth, rising; and they were age, sinking. no wonder it had been easy--they with their swollen veins and battered knuckles and weary in the bones of them from the long battles they had already fought. he remembered the time he put out old stowsher bill, at rush-cutters bay, in the eighteenth round, and how old bill had cried afterward in the dressing-room like a baby. perhaps old bill's rent had been overdue. perhaps he'd had at home a missus an' a couple of kiddies. and perhaps bill, that very day of the fight, had had a hungering for a piece of steak. bill had fought game and taken incredible punishment. he could see now, after he had gone through the mill himself, that stowsher bill had fought for a bigger stake, that night twenty years ago, than had young tom king, who had fought for glory and easy money. no wonder stowsher bill had cried afterward in the dressing-room.well, a man had only so many fights in him, to begin with. it was the iron law of the game. one man might have a hundred hard fights in him, another man only twenty; each, according to the make of him and the quality of his fibre, had a definite number, and, when he had fought them, he was done. yes, he had had more fights in him than most of them, and he had had far more than his share of the hard, gruelling fights--the kind that worked the heart and lungs to bursting, that took the elastic out of the arteries and made hard knots of muscle out of youth's sleek suppleness, that wore out nerve and stamina and made brain and bones weary from excess of effort and endurance overwrought. yes, he had done better than all of them. there were none of his old fighting partners left. he was the last of the old guard. he had seen them all finished, and he had had a hand in finishing some of them.they had tried him out against the old uns, and one after another he had put them away--laughing when, like old stowsher bill, they cried in the dressing-room. and now he was an old un, and they tried out the youngsters on him. there was that bloke, sandel. he had come over from new zealand with a record behind him. but nobody in australia knew anything about him, so they put him up against old tom king. if sandel made a showing, he would be given better men to fight, with bigger purses to win; so it was to be depended upon that he would put up a fierce battle. he had everything to win by it--money and glory and career; and tom king was the grizzled old chopping-block that guarded the highway to fame and fortune. and he had nothing to win except thirty quid, to pay to the landlord and the tradesmen. and, as tom king thus ruminated, there came to his stolid vision the form of youth, glorious youth, rising exultant and invincible, supple of muscle and silken of skin, with heart and lungs that had never been tired and torn and that laughed at limitation of effort. yes, youth was the nemesis. it destroyed the old uns and recked not that, in so doing, it destroyed itself. it enlarged its arteries and smashed its knuckles, and was in turn destroyed by youth. for youth was ever youthful. it was only age that grew old.at castlereagh street he turned to the left, and three blocks along came to the gayety. a crowd of young larrikins hanging outside the door made respectful way for him, and he heard one say to another: "that's 'im! that's tom king!"inside, on the way to his dressing-room, he encountered the secretary, a keen-eyed, shrewd-faced young man, who shook his hand."how are you feelin', tom?" he asked."fit as a fiddle," king answered, though he knew that he lied, and that if he had a quid, he would give it right there for a good piece of steak.when he emerged from the dressing-room, his seconds behind him, and came down the aisle to the squared ring in the centre of the hall, a burst of greeting and applause went up from the waiting crowd. he acknowledged salutations right and left, though few of the faces did he know. most of them were the faces of kiddies unborn when he was winning his first laurels in the squared ring. he leaped lightly to the raised platform and ducked through the ropes to his corner, where he sat down on a folding stool. jack ball, the referee, came over and shook his hand. ball was a broken- down pugilist who for over ten years had not entered the ring as a principal. king was glad that he had him for referee. they were both old uns. if he should rough it with sandel a bit beyond the rules, he knew ball could be depended upon to pass it by.aspiring young heavyweights, one after another, were climbing into the ring and being presented to the audience by the referee. also, he issued their challenges for them."young pronto," bill announced, "from north sydney, challenges the winner for fifty pounds side bet."the audience applauded, and applauded again as sandel himself sprang through the ropes and sat down in his corner. tom king looked across the ring at him curiously, for in a few minutes they would be locked together in merciless combat, each trying with all the force of him to knock the other into unconsciousness. but little could he see, for sandel, like himself, had trousers and sweater on over his ring costume. his face was strongly handsome, crowned with a curly mop of yellow hair, while his thick, muscular neck hinted at bodily magnificence.young pronto went to one corner and then the other, shaking hands with the principals and dropping down out of the ring. the challenges went on. ever youth climbed through the ropes--youth unknown, but insatiable--crying out to mankind that with strength and skill it would match issues with the winner. a few years before, in his own heyday of invincibleness, tom king would have been amused and bored by these preliminaries. but now he sat fascinated, unable to shake the vision of youth from his eyes. always were these youngsters rising up in the boxing game, springing through the ropes and shouting their defiance; and always were the old uns going down before them. they climbed to success over the bodies of the old uns. and ever they came, more and more youngsters--youth unquenchable and irresistible-- and ever they put the old uns away, themselves becoming old uns and travelling the same downward path, while behind them, ever pressing on them, was youth eternal--the new babies, grown lusty and dragging their elders down, with behind them more babies to the end of time--youth that must have its will and that will never die.king glanced over to the press box and nodded to morgan, of the sportsman, and corbett, of the referee. then he held out his hands, while sid sullivan and charley bates, his seconds, slipped on his gloves and laced them tight, closely watched by one of sandel's seconds, who first examined critically the tapes on king's knuckles. a second of his own was in sandel's corner, performing a like office. sandel's trousers were pulled off, and, as he stood up, his sweater was skinned off over his head. and tom king, looking, saw youth incarnate, deep-chested, heavy-thewed, with muscles that slipped and slid like live things under the white satin skin. the whole body was a-crawl with life, and tom king knew that it was a life that had never oozed its freshness out through the aching pores during the long fights wherein youth paid its toll and departed not quite so young as when it entered.the two men advanced to meet each other, and, as the gong sounded and the seconds clattered out of the ring with the folding stools, they shook hands and instantly took their fighting attitudes. and instantly, like a mechanism of steel and springs balanced on a hair trigger, sandel was in and out and in again, landing a left to the eyes, a right to the ribs, ducking a counter, dancing lightly away and dancing menacingly back again. he was swift and clever. it was a dazzling exhibition. the house yelled its approbation. but king was not dazzled. he had fought too many fights and too many youngsters. he knew the blows for what they were--too quick and too deft to be dangerous. evidently sandel was going to rush things from the start. it was to be expected. it was the way of youth, expending its splendour and excellence in wild insurgence and furious onslaught, overwhelming opposition with its own unlimited glory of strength and desire.sandel was in and out, here, there, and everywhere, light-footed and eager- hearted, a living wonder of white flesh and stinging muscle that wove itself into a dazzling fabric of attack, slipping and leaping like a flying shuttle from action to action through a thousand actions, all of them centred upon the destruction of tom king, who stood between him and fortune. and tom king patiently endured. he knew his business, and he knew youth now that youth was no longer his. there was nothing to do till the other lost some of his steam, was his thought, and he grinned to himself as he deliberately ducked so as to receive a heavy blow on the top of his head. it was a wicked thing to do, yet eminently fair according to the rules of the boxing game. a man was supposed to take care of his own knuckles, and, if he insisted on hitting an opponent on the top of the head, he did so at his own peril. king could have ducked lower and let the blow whiz harmlessly past, but he remembered his own early fights and how he smashed his first knuckle on the head of the welsh terror. he was but playing the game. that duck had accounted for one of sandel's knuckles. not that sandel would mind it now. he would go on, superbly regardless, hitting as hard as ever throughout the fight. but later on, when the long ring battles had begun to tell, he would regret that knuckle and look back and remember how he smashed it on tom king's head.the first round was all sandel's, and he had the house yelling with the rapidity of his whirlwind rushes. he overwhelmed king with avalanches of punches, and king did nothing. he never struck once, contenting himself with covering up, blocking and ducking and clinching to avoid punishment. he occasionally feinted, shook his head when the weight of a punch landed, and moved stolidly about, never leaping or springing or wasting an ounce of strength. sandel must foam the froth of youth away before discreet age could dare to retaliate. all king's movements were slow and methodical, and his heavy-lidded, slow-moving eyes gave him the appearance of being half asleep or dazed. yet they were eyes that saw everything, that had been trained to see everything through all his twenty years and odd in the ring. they were eyes that did not blink or waver before an impending blow, but that coolly saw and measured distance.seated in his corner for the minute's rest at the end of the round, he lay back with outstretched legs, his arms resting on the right angle of the ropes, his chest and abdomen heaving frankly and deeply as he gulped down the air driven by the towels of his seconds. he listened with closed eyes to the voices of the house, "why don't yeh fight, tom?" many were crying. "yeh ain't afraid of 'im, are yeh?""muscle-bound," he heard a man on a front seat comment. "he can't move quicker. two to one on sandel, in quids."the gong struck and the two men advanced from their corners. sandel came forward fully three-quarters of the distance, eager to begin again; but king was content to advance the shorter distance. it was in line with his policy of economy. he had not been well trained, and he had not had enough to eat, and every step counted. besides, he had already walked two miles to the ringside. it was a repetition of the first round, with sandel attacking like a whirlwind and with the audience indignantly demanding why king did not fight. beyond feinting and several slowly delivered and ineffectual blows he did nothing save block and stall and clinch. sandel wanted to make the pace fast, while king, out of his wisdom, refused to accommodate him. he grinned with a certain wistful pathos in his ring- battered countenance, and went on cherishing his strength with the jealousy of which only age is capable. sandel was youth, and he threw his strength away with the munificent abandon of youth. to king belonged the ring generalship, the wisdom bred of long, aching fights. he watched with cool eyes and head, moving slowly and waiting for sandel's froth to foam away. to the majority of the onlookers it seemed as though king was hopelessly outclassed, and they voiced their opinion in offers of three to one on sandel. but there were wise ones, a few, who knew king of old time, and who covered what they considered easy money.the third round began as usual, one-sided, with sandel doing all the leading, and delivering all the punishment. a half-minute had passed when sandel, over-confident, left an opening. king's eyes and right arm flashed in the same instant. it was his first real blow--a hook, with the twisted arch of the arm to make it rigid, and with all the weight of the half- pivoted body behind it. it was like a sleepy-seeming lion suddenly thrusting out a lightning paw. sandel, caught on the side of the jaw, was felled like a bullock. the audience gasped and murmured awe-stricken applause. the man was not muscle-bound, after all, and he could drive a blow like a trip-hammer.sandel was shaken. he rolled over and attempted to rise, but the sharp yells from his seconds to take the count restrained him. he knelt on one knee, ready to rise, and waited, while the referee stood over him, counting the seconds loudly in his ear. at the ninth he rose in fighting attitude, and tom king, facing him, knew regret that the blow had not been an inch nearer the point of the jaw. that would have been a knock-out, and he could have carried the thirty quid home to the missus and the kiddies.the round continued to the end of its three minutes, sandel for the first time respectful of his opponent and king slow of movement and sleepy-eyed as ever. as the round neared its close, king, warned of the fact by sight of the seconds crouching outside ready for the spring in through the ropes, worked the fight around to his own corner. and when the gong struck, he sat down immediately on the waiting stool, while sandel had to walk all the way across the diagonal of the square to his own corner. it was a little thing, but it was the sum of little things that counted. sandel was compelled to walk that many more steps, to give up that much energy, and to lose a part of the precious minute of rest. at the beginning of every round king loafed slowly out from his corner, forcing his opponent to advance the greater distance. the end of every round found the fight manoeuvred by king into his own corner so that he could immediately sit down.two more rounds went by, in which king was parsimonious of effort and sandel prodigal. the latter's attempt to force a fast pace made king uncomfortable, for a fair percentage of the multitudinous blows showered upon him went home. yet king persisted in his dogged slowness, despite the crying of the young hot-heads for him to go in and fight. again, in the sixth round, sandel was careless, again tom king's fearful right flashed out to the jaw, and again sandel took the nine seconds count.by the seventh round sandel's pink of condition was gone, and he settled down to what he knew was to be the hardest fight in his experience. tom king was an old un, but a better old un than he had ever encountered--an old un who never lost his head, who was remarkably able at defence, whose blows had the impact of a knotted club, and who had a knockout in either hand. nevertheless, tom king dared not hit often. he never forgot his battered knuckles, and knew that every hit must count if the knuckles were to last out the fight. as he sat in his corner, glancing across at his opponent, the thought came to him that the sum of his wisdom and sandel's youth would constitute a world's champion heavyweight. but that was the trouble. sandel would never become a world champion. he lacked the wisdom, and the only way for him to get it was to buy it with youth; and when wisdom was his, youth would have been spent in buying it.king took every advantage he knew. he never missed an opportunity to clinch, and in effecting most of the clinches his shoulder drove stiffly into the other's ribs. in the philosophy of the ring a shoulder was as good as a punch so far as damage was concerned, and a great deal better so far as concerned expenditure of effort. also, in the clinches king rested his weight on his opponent, and was loath to let go. this compelled the interference of the referee, who tore them apart, always assisted by sandel, who had not yet learned to rest. he could not refrain from using those glorious flying arms and writhing muscles of his, and when the other rushed into a clinch, striking shoulder against ribs, and with head resting under sandel's left arm, sandel almost invariably swung his right behind his own back and into the projecting face. it was a clever stroke, much admired by the audience, but it was not dangerous, and was, therefore, just that much wasted strength. but sandel was tireless and unaware of limitations, and king grinned and doggedly endured.sandel developed a fierce right to the body, which made it appear that king was taking an enormous amount of punishment, and it was only the old ringsters who appreciated the deft touch of king's left glove to the other's biceps just before the impact of the blow. it was true, the blow landed each time; but each time it was robbed of its power by that touch on the biceps. in the ninth round, three times inside a minute, king's right hooked its twisted arch to the jaw; and three times sandel's body, heavy as it was, was levelled to the mat. each time he took the nine seconds allowed him and rose to his feet, shaken and jarred, but still strong. he had lost much of his speed, and he wasted less effort. he was fighting grimly; but he continued to draw upon his chief asset, which was youth. king's chief asset was experience. as his vitality had dimmed and his vigour abated, he had replaced them with cunning, with wisdom born of the long fights and with a careful shepherding of strength. not alone had he learned never to make a superfluous movement, but he had learned how to seduce an opponent into throwing his strength away. again and again, by feint of foot and hand and body he continued to inveigle sandel into leaping back, ducking, or countering. king rested, but he never permitted sandel to rest. it was the strategy of age.early in the tenth round king began stopping the other's rushes with straight lefts to the face, and sandel, grown wary, responded by drawing the left, then by ducking it and delivering his right in a swinging hook to the side of the head. it was too high up to be vitally effective; but when first it landed, king knew the old, familiar descent of the black veil of unconsciousness across his mind. for the instant, or for the slighest fraction of an instant, rather, he ceased. in the one moment he saw his opponent ducking out of his field of vision and the background of white, watching faces; in the next moment he again saw his opponent and the background of faces. it was as if he had slept for a time and just opened his eyes again, and yet the interval of unconsciousness was so microscopically short that there had been no time for him to fall. the audience saw him totter and his knees give, and then saw him recover and tuck his chin deeper into the shelter of his left shoulder.several times sandel repeated the blow, keeping king partially dazed, and then the latter worked out his defence, which was also a counter. feinting with his left he took a half-step backward, at the same time upper cutting with the whole strength of his right. so accurately was it timed that it landed squarely on sandel's face in the full, downward sweep of the duck, and sandel lifted in the air and curled backward, striking the mat on his head and shoulders. twice king achieved this, then turned loose and hammered his opponent to the ropes. he gave sandel no chance to rest or to set himself, but smashed blow in upon blow till the house rose to its feet and the air was filled with an unbroken roar of applause. but sandel's strength and endurance were superb, and he continued to stay on his feet. a knock-out seemed certain, and a captain of police, appalled at the dreadful punishment, arose by the ringside to stop the fight. the gong struck for the end of the round and sandel staggered to his corner, protesting to the captain that he was sound and strong. to prove it, he threw two back-air-springs, and the police captain gave in.tom king, leaning back in his corner and breathing hard, was disappointed. if the fight had been stopped, the referee, perforce, would have rendered him the decision and the purse would have been his. unlike sandel, he was not fighting for glory or career, but for thirty quid. and now sandel would recuperate in the minute of rest.youth will be served--this saying flashed into king's mind, and he remembered the first time he had heard it, the night when he had put away stowsher bill. the toff who had bought him a drink after the fight and patted him on the shoulder had used those words. youth will be served! the toff was right. and on that night in the long ago he had been youth. to-night youth sat in the opposite corner. as for himself, he had been fighting for half an hour now, and he was an old man. had he fought like sandel, he would not have lasted fifteen minutes. but the point was that he did not recuperate. those upstanding arteries and that sorely tried heart would not enable him to gather strength in the intervals between the rounds. and he had not had sufficient strength in him to begin with. his legs were heavy under him and beginning to cramp. he should not have walked those two miles to the fight. and there was the steak which he had got up longing for that morning. a great and terrible hatred rose up in him for the butchers who had refused him credit. it was hard for an old man to go into a fight without enough to eat. and a piece of steak was such a little thing, a few pennies at best; yet it meant thirty quid to him.with the gong that opened the eleventh round, sandel rushed, making a show of freshness which he did not really possess. king knew it for what it was--a bluff as old as the game itself. he clinched to save himself, then, going free, allowed sandel to get set. this was what king desired. he feinted with his left, drew the answering duck and swinging upward hook, then made the half-step backward, delivered the upper cut full to the face and crumpled sandel over to the mat. after that he never let him rest, receiving punishment himself, but inflicting far more, smashing sandel to the ropes, hooking and driving all manner of blows into him, tearing away from his clinches or punching him out of attempted clinches, and ever when sandel would have fallen, catching him with one uplifting hand and with the other immediately smashing him into the ropes where he could not fall.the house by this time had gone mad, and it was his house, nearly every voice yelling: "go it, tom!" "get 'im! get 'im!" "you've got 'im, tom! you've got 'im!" it was to be a whirlwind finish, and that was what a ringside audience paid to see.and tom king, who for half an hour had conserved his strength, now expended it prodigally in the one great effort he knew he had in him. it was his one chance--now or not at all. his strength was waning fast, and his hope was that before the last of it ebbed out of him he would have beaten his opponent down for the count. and as he continued to strike and force, coolly estimating the weight of his blows and the quality of the damage wrought, he realized how hard a man sandel was to knock out. stamina and endurance were his to an extreme degree, and they were the virgin stamina and endurance of youth. sandel was certainly a coming man. he had it in him. only out of such rugged fibre were successful fighters fashioned.sandel was reeling and staggering, but tom king's legs were cramping and his knuckles going back on him. yet he steeled himself to strike the fierce blows, every one of which brought anguish to his tortured hands. though now he was receiving practically no punishment, he was weakening as rapidly as the other. his blows went home, but there was no longer the weight behind them, and each blow was the result of a severe effort of will. his legs were like lead, and they dragged visibly under him; while sandel's backers, cheered by this symptom, began calling encouragement to their man.king was spurred to a burst of effort. he delivered two blows in succession--a left, a trifle too high, to the solar plexus, and a right cross to the jaw. they were not heavy blows, yet so weak and dazed was sandel that he went down and lay quivering. the referee stood over him, shouting the count of the fatal seconds in his ear. if before the tenth second was called, he did not rise, the fight was lost. the house stood in hushed silence. king rested on trembling legs. a mortal dizziness was upon him, and before his eyes the sea of faces sagged and swayed, while to his ears, as from a remote distance, came the count of the referee. yet he looked upon the fight as his. it was impossible that a man so punished could rise.only youth could rise, and sandel rose. at the fourth second he rolled over on his face and groped blindly for the ropes. by the seventh second he had dragged himself to his knee, where he rested, his head rolling groggily on his shoulders. as the referee cried "nine!" sandel stood upright, in proper stalling position, his left arm wrapped about his face, his right wrapped about his stomach. thus were his vital points guarded, while he lurched forward toward king in the hope of effecting a clinch and gaining more time.at the instant sandel arose, king was at him, but the two blows he delivered were muffled on the stalled arms. the next moment sandel was in the clinch and holding on desperately while the referee strove to drag the two men apart. king helped to force himself free. he knew the rapidity with which youth recovered, and he knew that sandel was his if he could prevent that recovery. one stiff punch would do it. sandel was his, indubitably his. he had out-generalled him, out-fought him, out-pointed him. sandel reeled out of the clinch, balanced on the hair line between defeat or survival. one good blow would topple him over and down and out. and tom king, in a flash of bitterness, remembered the piece of steak and wished that he had it then behind that necessary punch he must deliver. he nerved himself for the blow, but it was not heavy enough nor swift enough. sandel swayed, but did not fall, staggering back to the ropes and holding on. king staggered after him, and, with a pang like that of dissolution, delivered another blow. but his body had deserted him. all that was left of him was a fighting intelligence that was dimmed and clouded from exhaustion. the blow that was aimed for the jaw struck no higher than the shoulder. he had willed the blow higher, but the tired muscles had not been able to obey. and, from the impact of the blow, tom king himself reeled back and nearly fell. once again he strove. this time his punch missed altogether, and, from absolute weakness, he fell against sandel and clinched, holding on to him to save himself from sinking to the floor.king did not attempt to free himself. he had shot his bolt. he was gone. and youth had been served. even in the clinch he could feel sandel growing stronger against him. when the referee thrust them apart, there, before his eyes, he saw youth recuperate. from instant to instant sandel grew stronger. his punches, weak and futile at first, became stiff and accurate. tom king's bleared eyes saw the gloved fist driving at his jaw, and he willed to guard it by interposing his arm. he saw the danger, willed the act; but the arm was too heavy. it seemed burdened with a hundredweight of lead. it would not lift itself, and he strove to lift it with his soul. then the gloved fist landed home. he experienced a sharp snap that was like an electric spark, and, simultaneously, the veil of blackness enveloped him.when he opened his eyes again he was in his corner, and he heard the yelling of the audience like the roar of the surf at bondi beach. a wet sponge was being pressed against the base of his brain, and sid sullivan was blowing cold water in a refreshing spray over his face and chest. his gloves had already been removed, and sandel, bending over him, was shaking his hand. he bore no ill-will toward the man who had put him out and he returned the grip with a heartiness that made his battered knuckles protest. then sandel stepped to the centre of the ring and the audience hushed its pandemonium to hear him accept young pronto's challenge and offer to increase the side bet to one hundred pounds. king looked on apathetically while his seconds mopped the streaming water from him, dried his face, and prepared him to leave the ring. he felt hungry. it was not the ordinary, gnawing kind, but a great faintness, a palpitation at the pit of the stomach that communicated itself to all his body. he remembered back into the fight to the moment when he had sandel swaying and tottering on the hair-line balance of defeat. ah, that piece of steak would have done it! he had lacked just that for the decisive blow, and he had lost. it was all because of the piece of steak.his seconds were half-supporting him as they helped him through the ropes. he tore free from them, ducked through the ropes unaided, and leaped heavily to the floor, following on their heels as they forced a passage for him down the crowded centre aisle. leaving the dressing-room for the street, in the entrance to the hall, some young fellow spoke to him."w'y didn't yuh go in an' get 'im when yuh 'ad 'im?" the young fellow asked."aw, go to hell!" said tom king, and passed down the steps to the sidewalk.the doors of the public-house at the corner were swinging wide, and he saw the lights and the smiling barmaids, heard the many voices discussing the fight and the prosperous chink of money on the bar. somebody called to him to have a drink. he hesitated perceptibly, then refused and went on his way.he had not a copper in his pocket, and the two-mile walk home seemed very long. he was certainly getting old. crossing the domain, he sat down suddenly on a bench, unnerved by the thought of the missus sitting up for him, waiting to learn the outcome of the fight. that was harder than any knockout, and it seemed almost impossible to face.he felt weak and sore, and the pain of his smashed knuckles warned him that, even if he could find a job at navvy work, it would be a week before he could grip a pick handle or a shovel. the hunger palpitation at the pit of the stomach was sickening. his wretchedness overwhelmed him, and into his eyes came an unwonted moisture. he covered his face with his hands, and, as he cried, he remembered stowsher bill and how he had served him that night in the long ago. poor old stowsher bill! he could understand now why bill had cried in the dressing-room.and after all the weather was ideal. they could not have had a more perfect day for a garden-party if they had ordered it. windless, warm, the sky without a cloud. only the blue was veiled with a haze of light gold, as it is sometimes in early summer. the gardener had been up since dawn, mowing the lawns and sweeping them, until the grass and the dark flat rosettes where the daisy plants had been seemed to shine. as for the roses, you could not help feeling they understood that roses are the only flowers that impress people at garden- parties; the only flowers that everybody is certain of knowing. hundreds, yes, literally hundreds, had come out in a single night; the green bushes bowed down as though they had been visited by archangels.breakfast was not yet over before the men came to put up the marquee."where do you want the marquee put, mother?""my dear child, it's no use asking me. i'm determined to leave everything to you children this year. forget i am your mother. treat me as an honoured guest."but meg could not possibly go and supervise the men. she had washed her hair before breakfast, and she sat drinking her coffee in a green turban, with a dark wet curl stamped on each cheek. jose, the butterfly, always came down in a silk petticoat and a kimono jacket."you'll have to go, laura; you're the artistic one."away laura flew, still holding her piece of bread-and-butter. it's so delicious to have an excuse for eating out of doors, and besides, she loved having to arrange things; she always felt she could do it so much better than anybody else.four men in their shirt-sleeves stood grouped together on the garden path. they carried staves covered with rolls of canvas, and they had big tool-bags slung on their backs. they looked impressive. laura wished now that she had not got the bread-and-butter, but there was nowhere to put it, and she couldn't possibly throw it away. she blushed and tried to look severe and even a little bit short-sighted as she came up to them."good morning," she said, copying her mother's voice. but that sounded so fearfully affected that she was ashamed, and stammered like a little girl, "oh - er - have you come - is it about the marquee?""that's right, miss," said the tallest of the men, a lanky, freckled fellow, and he shifted his tool-bag, knocked back his straw hat and smiled down at her. "that's about it."his smile was so easy, so friendly that laura recovered. what nice eyes he had, small, but such a dark blue! and now she looked at the others, they were smiling too. "cheer up, we won't bite," their smile seemed to say. how very nice workmen were! and what a beautiful morning! she mustn't mention the morning; she must be business-like. the marquee."well, what about the lily-lawn? would that do?"and she pointed to the lily-lawn with the hand that didn't hold the bread-and- butter. they turned, they stared in the direction. a little fat chap thrust out his under-lip, and the tall fellow frowned."i don't fancy it," said he. "not conspicuous enough. you see, with a thing like a marquee," and he turned to laura in his easy way, "you want to put it somewhere where it'll give you a bang slap in the eye, if you follow me."laura's upbringing made her wonder for a moment whether it was quite respectful of a workman to talk to her of bangs slap in the eye. but she did quite follow him."a corner of the tennis-court," she suggested. "but the band's going to be in one corner.""h'm, going to have a band, are you?" said another of the workmen. he was pale. he had a haggard look as his dark eyes scanned the tennis-court. what was he thinking?"only a very small band," said laura gently. perhaps he wouldn't mind so much if the band was quite small. but the tall fellow interrupted."look here, miss, that's the place. against those trees. over there. that'll do fine."against the karakas. then the karaka-trees would be hidden. and they were so lovely, with their broad, gleaming leaves, and their clusters of yellow fruit. they were like trees you imagined growing on a desert island, proud, solitary, lifting their leaves and fruits to the sun in a kind of silent splendour. must they be hidden by a marquee?they must. already the men had shouldered their staves and were making for the place. only the tall fellow was left. he bent down, pinched a sprig of lavender, put his thumb and forefinger to his nose and snuffed up the smell. when laura saw that gesture she forgot all about the karakas in her wonder at him caring for things like that - caring for the smell of lavender. how many men that she knew would have done such a thing? oh, how extraordinarily nice workmen were, she thought. why couldn't she have workmen for her friends rather than the silly boys she danced with and who came to sunday night supper? she would get on much better with men like these.it's all the fault, she decided, as the tall fellow drew something on the back of an envelope, something that was to be looped up or left to hang, of these absurd class distinctions. well, for her part, she didn't feel them. not a bit, not an atom ... and now there came the chock-chock of wooden hammers. some one whistled, some one sang out, "are you right there, matey?" "matey!" the friendliness of it, the - the - just to prove how happy she was, just to show the tall fellow how at home she felt, and how she despised stupid conventions, laura took a big bite of her bread-and-butter as she stared at the little drawing. she felt just like a work-girl."laura, laura, where are you? telephone, laura!" a voice cried from the house."coming!" away she skimmed, over the lawn, up the path, up the steps, across the veranda, and into the porch. in the hall her father and laurie were brushing their hats ready to go to the office."i say, laura," said laurie very fast, "you might just give a squiz at my coat before this afternoon. see if it wants pressing.""i will," said she. suddenly she couldn't stop herself. she ran at laurie and gave him a small, quick squeeze. "oh, i do love parties, don't you?" gasped laura."rather," said laurie's warm, boyish voice, and he squeezed his sister too, and gave her a gentle push. "dash off to the telephone, old girl."the telephone. "yes, yes; oh yes. kitty? good morning, dear. come to lunch? do, dear. delighted of course. it will only be a very scratch meal - just the sandwich crusts and broken meringue-shells and what's left over. yes, isn't it a perfect morning? your white? oh, i certainly should. one moment - hold the line. mother's calling." and laura sat back. "what, mother? can't hear."mrs. sheridan's voice floated down the stairs. "tell her to wear that sweet hat she had on last sunday.""mother says you're to wear that sweet hat you had on last sunday. good. one o'clock. bye-bye."laura put back the receiver, flung her arms over her head, took a deep breath, stretched and let them fall. "huh," she sighed, and the moment after the sigh she sat up quickly. she was still, listening. all the doors in the house seemed to be open. the house was alive with soft, quick steps and running voices. the green baize door that led to the kitchen regions swung open and shut with a muffled thud. and now there came a long, chuckling absurd sound. it was the heavy piano being moved on its stiff castors. but the air! if you stopped to notice, was the air always like this? little faint winds were playing chase, in at the tops of the windows, out at the doors. and there were two tiny spots of sun, one on the inkpot, one on a silver photograph frame, playing too. darling little spots. especially the one on the inkpot lid. it was quite warm. a warm little silver star. she could have kissed it.the front door bell pealed, and there sounded the rustle of sadie's print skirt on the stairs. a man's voice murmured; sadie answered, careless, "i'm sure i don't know. wait. i'll ask mrs sheridan.""what is it, sadie?" laura came into the hall."it's the florist, miss laura."it was, indeed. there, just inside the door, stood a wide, shallow tray full of pots of pink lilies. no other kind. nothing but lilies - canna lilies, big pink flowers, wide open, radiant, almost frighteningly alive on bright crimson stems."o-oh, sadie!" said laura, and the sound was like a little moan. she crouched down as if to warm herself at that blaze of lilies; she felt they were in her fingers, on her lips, growing in her breast."it's some mistake," she said faintly. "nobody ever ordered so many. sadie, go and find mother."but at that moment mrs. sheridan joined them."it's quite right," she said calmly. "yes, i ordered them. aren't they lovely?" she pressed laura's arm. "i was passing the shop yesterday, and i saw them in the window. and i suddenly thought for once in my life i shall have enough canna lilies. the garden-party will be a good excuse.""but i thought you said you didn't mean to interfere," said laura. sadie had gone. the florist's man was still outside at his van. she put her arm round her mother's neck and gently, very gently, she bit her mother's ear."my darling child, you wouldn't like a logical mother, would you? don't do that. here's the man."he carried more lilies still, another whole tray."bank them up, just inside the door, on both sides of the porch, please," said mrs. sheridan. "don't you agree, laura?""oh, i do, mother."in the drawing-room meg, jose and good little hans had at last succeeded in moving the piano."now, if we put this chesterfield against the wall and move everything out of the room except the chairs, don't you think?""quite.""hans, move these tables into the smoking-room, and bring a sweeper to take these marks off the carpet and - one moment, hans - " jose loved giving orders to the servants, and they loved obeying her. she always made them feel they were taking part in some drama. "tell mother and miss laura to come here at once."very good, miss jose."she turned to meg. "i want to hear what the piano sounds like, just in case i'm asked to sing this afternoon. let's try over 'this life is weary.'"pom! ta-ta-ta tee-ta! the piano burst out so passionately that jose's face changed. she clasped her hands. she looked mournfully and enigmatically at her mother and laura as they came in."this life is wee-ary, a tear - a sigh. a love that chan-ges, this life is wee-ary, a tear - a sigh. a love that chan-ges, and then ... good-bye!"but at the word "good-bye," and although the piano sounded more desperate than ever, her face broke into a brilliant, dreadfully unsympathetic smile."aren't i in good voice, mummy?" she beamed."this life is wee-ary, hope comes to die. a dream - a wa-kening."but now sadie interrupted them. "what is it, sadie?""if you please, m'm, cook says have you got the flags for the sandwiches?""the flags for the sandwiches, sadie?" echoed mrs. sheridan dreamily. and the children knew by her face that she hadn't got them. "let me see." and she said to sadie firmly, "tell cook i'll let her have them in ten minutes.sadie went."now, laura," said her mother quickly, "come with me into the smoking-room. i've got the names somewhere on the back of an envelope. you'll have to write them out for me. meg, go upstairs this minute and take that wet thing off your head. jose, run and finish dressing this instant. do you hear me, children, or shall i have to tell your father when he comes home to-night? and - and, jose, pacify cook if you do go into the kitchen, will you? i'm terrified of her this morning."the envelope was found at last behind the dining-room clock, though how it had got there mrs. sheridan could not imagine."one of you children must have stolen it out of my bag, because i remember vividly - cream cheese and lemon-curd. have you done that?""yes.""egg and--" mrs. sheridan held the envelope away from her. "it looks like mice. it can't be mice, can it?""olive, pet," said laura, looking over her shoulder."yes, of course, olive. what a horrible combination it sounds. egg and olive."they were finished at last, and laura took them off to the kitchen. she found jose there pacifying the cook, who did not look at all terrifying."i have never seen such exquisite sandwiches," said jose's rapturous voice. "how many kinds did you say there were, cook? fifteen?""fifteen, miss jose.""well, cook, i congratulate you."cook swept up crusts with the long sandwich knife, and smiled broadly."godber's has come," announced sadie, issuing out of the pantry. she had seen the man pass the window.that meant the cream puffs had come. godber's were famous for their cream puffs. nobody ever thought of making them at home."bring them in and put them on the table, my girl," ordered cook.sadie brought them in and went back to the door. of course laura and jose were far too grown-up to really care about such things. all the same, they couldn't help agreeing that the puffs looked very attractive. very. cook began arranging them, shaking off the extra icing sugar."don't they carry one back to all one's parties?" said laura."i suppose they do," said practical jose, who never liked to be carried back. "they look beautifully light and feathery, i must say.""have one each, my dears," said cook in her comfortable voice. "yer ma won't know."oh, impossible. fancy cream puffs so soon after breakfast. the very idea made one shudder. all the same, two minutes later jose and laura were licking their fingers with that absorbed inward look that only comes from whipped cream."let's go into the garden, out by the back way," suggested laura. "i want to see how the men are getting on with the marquee. they're such awfully nice men."but the back door was blocked by cook, sadie, godber's man and hans.something had happened."tuk-tuk-tuk," clucked cook like an agitated hen. sadie had her hand clapped to her cheek as though she had toothache. hans's face was screwed up in the effort to understand. only godber's man seemed to be enjoying himself; it was his story."what's the matter? what's happened?""there's been a horrible accident," said cook. "a man killed.""a man killed! where? how? when?"but godber's man wasn't going to have his story snatched from under his very nose."know those little cottages just below here, miss?" know them? of course, she knew them. "well, there's a young chap living there, name of scott, a carter. his horse shied at a traction-engine, corner of hawke street this morning, and he was thrown out on the back of his head. killed.""dead!" laura stared at godber's man."dead when they picked him up," said godber's man with relish. "they were taking the body home as i come up here." and he said to the cook, "he's left a wife and five little ones.""jose, come here." laura caught hold of her sister's sleeve and dragged her through the kitchen to the other side of the green baize door. there she paused and leaned against it. "jose!" she said, horrified, "however are we going to stop everything?""stop everything, laura!" cried jose in astonishment. "what do you mean?""stop the garden-party, of course." why did jose pretend?but jose was still more amazed. "stop the garden-party? my dear laura, don't be so absurd. of course we can't do anything of the kind. nobody expects us to. don't be so extravagant.""but we can't possibly have a garden-party with a man dead just outside the front gate."that really was extravagant, for the little cottages were in a lane to themselves at the very bottom of a steep rise that led up to the house. a broad road ran between. true, they were far too near. they were the greatest possible eyesore, and they had no right to be in that neighbourhood at all. they were little mean dwellings painted a chocolate brown. in the garden patches there was nothing but cabbage stalks, sick hens and tomato cans. the very smoke coming out of their chimneys was poverty-stricken. little rags and shreds of smoke, so unlike the great silvery plumes that uncurled from the sheridans' chimneys. washerwomen lived in the lane and sweeps and a cobbler, and a man whose house-front was studded all over with minute bird-cages. children swarmed. when the sheridans were little they were forbidden to set foot there because of the revolting language and of what they might catch. but since they were grown up, laura and laurie on their prowls sometimes walked through. it was disgusting and sordid. they came out with a shudder. but still one must go everywhere; one must see everything. so through they went."and just think of what the band would sound like to that poor woman," said laura."oh, laura!" jose began to be seriously annoyed. "if you're going to stop a band playing every time some one has an accident, you'll lead a very strenuous life. i'm every bit as sorry about it as you. i feel just as sympathetic." her eyes hardened. she looked at her sister just as she used to when they were little and fighting together. "you won't bring a drunken workman back to life by being sentimental," she said softly."drunk! who said he was drunk?" laura turned furiously on jose. she said, just as they had used to say on those occasions, "i'm going straight up to tell mother.""do, dear," cooed jose."mother, can i come into your room?" laura turned the big glass door-knob."of course, child. why, what's the matter? what's given you such a colour?" and mrs. sheridan turned round from her dressing-table. she was trying on a new hat."mother, a man's been killed," began laura."not in the garden?" interrupted her mother."no, no!""oh, what a fright you gave me!" mrs. sheridan sighed with relief, and took off the big hat and held it on her knees."but listen, mother," said laura. breathless, half-choking, she told the dreadful story. "of course, we can't have our party, can we?" she pleaded. "the band and everybody arriving. they'd hear us, mother; they're nearly neighbours!"to laura's astonishment her mother behaved just like jose; it was harder to bear because she seemed amused. she refused to take laura seriously."but, my dear child, use your common sense. it's only by accident we've heard of it. if some one had died there normally - and i can't understand how they keep alive in those poky little holes - we should still be having our party, shouldn't we?"laura had to say "yes" to that, but she felt it was all wrong. she sat down on her mother's sofa and pinched the cushion frill."mother, isn't it terribly heartless of us?" she asked."darling!" mrs. sheridan got up and came over to her, carrying the hat. before laura could stop her she had popped it on. "my child!" said her mother, "the hat is yours. it's made for you. it's much too young for me. i have never seen you look such a picture. look at yourself!" and she held up her hand- mirror."but, mother," laura began again. she couldn't look at herself; she turned aside.this time mrs. sheridan lost patience just as jose had done."you are being very absurd, laura," she said coldly. "people like that don't expect sacrifices from us. and it's not very sympathetic to spoil everybody's enjoyment as you're doing now.""i don't understand," said laura, and she walked quickly out of the room into her own bedroom. there, quite by chance, the first thing she saw was this charming girl in the mirror, in her black hat trimmed with gold daisies, and a long black velvet ribbon. never had she imagined she could look like that. is mother right? she thought. and now she hoped her mother was right. am i being extravagant? perhaps it was extravagant. just for a moment she had another glimpse of that poor woman and those little children, and the body being carried into the house. but it all seemed blurred, unreal, like a picture in the newspaper. i'll remember it again after the party's over, she decided. and somehow that seemed quite the best plan âlunch was over by half-past one. by half-past two they were all ready for the fray. the green-coated band had arrived and was established in a corner of the tennis-court."my dear!" trilled kitty maitland, "aren't they too like frogs for words? you ought to have arranged them round the pond with the conductor in the middle on a leaf."laurie arrived and hailed them on his way to dress. at the sight of him laura remembered the accident again. she wanted to tell him. if laurie agreed with the others, then it was bound to be all right. and she followed him into the hall."laurie!""hallo!" he was half-way upstairs, but when he turned round and saw laura he suddenly puffed out his cheeks and goggled his eyes at her. "my word, laura! you do look stunning," said laurie. "what an absolutely topping hat!"laura said faintly "is it?" and smiled up at laurie, and didn't tell him after all.soon after that people began coming in streams. the band struck up; the hired waiters ran from the house to the marquee. wherever you looked there were couples strolling, bending to the flowers, greeting, moving on over the lawn. they were like bright birds that had alighted in the sheridans' garden for this one afternoon, on their way to - where? ah, what happiness it is to be with people who all are happy, to press hands, press cheeks, smile into eyes."darling laura, how well you look!""what a becoming hat, child!""laura, you look quite spanish. i've never seen you look so striking."and laura, glowing, answered softly, "have you had tea? won't you have an ice? the passion-fruit ices really are rather special." she ran to her father and begged him. "daddy darling, can't the band have something to drink?"and the perfect afternoon slowly ripened, slowly faded, slowly its petals closed."never a more delightful garden-party ... " "the greatest success ... " "quite the most ... "laura helped her mother with the good-byes. they stood side by side in the porch till it was all over."all over, all over, thank heaven," said mrs. sheridan. "round up the others, laura. let's go and have some fresh coffee. i'm exhausted. yes, it's been very successful. but oh, these parties, these parties! why will you children insist on giving parties!" and they all of them sat down in the deserted marquee."have a sandwich, daddy dear. i wrote the flag.""thanks." mr. sheridan took a bite and the sandwich was gone. he took another. "i suppose you didn't hear of a beastly accident that happened to-day?" he said."my dear," said mrs. sheridan, holding up her hand, "we did. it nearly ruined the party. laura insisted we should put it off.""oh, mother!" laura didn't want to be teased about it."it was a horrible affair all the same," said mr. sheridan. "the chap was married too. lived just below in the lane, and leaves a wife and half a dozen kiddies, so they say."an awkward little silence fell. mrs. sheridan fidgeted with her cup. really, it was very tactless of father âsuddenly she looked up. there on the table were all those sandwiches, cakes, puffs, all uneaten, all going to be wasted. she had one of her brilliant ideas."i know," she said. "let's make up a basket. let's send that poor creature some of this perfectly good food. at any rate, it will be the greatest treat for the children. don't you agree? and she's sure to have neighbours calling in and so on. what a point to have it all ready prepared. laura!" she jumped up. "get me the big basket out of the stairs cupboard.""but, mother, do you really think it's a good idea?" said laura.again, how curious, she seemed to be different from them all. to take scraps from their party. would the poor woman really like that?"of course! what's the matter with you to-day? an hour or two ago you were insisting on us being sympathetic, and now--"oh well! laura ran for the basket. it was filled, it was heaped by her mother."take it yourself, darling," said she. "run down just as you are. no, wait, take the arum lilies too. people of that class are so impressed by arum lilies.""the stems will ruin her lace frock," said practical jose.so they would. just in time. "only the basket, then. and, laura!" - her mother followed her out of the marquee - "don't on any account--""what mother?"no, better not put such ideas into the child's head! "nothing! run along."it was just growing dusky as laura shut their garden gates. a big dog ran by like a shadow. the road gleamed white, and down below in the hollow the little cottages were in deep shade. how quiet it seemed after the afternoon. here she was going down the hill to somewhere where a man lay dead, and she couldn't realize it. why couldn't she? she stopped a minute. and it seemed to her that kisses, voices, tinkling spoons, laughter, the smell of crushed grass were somehow inside her. she had no room for anything else. how strange! she looked up at the pale sky, and all she thought was, "yes, it was the most successful party."now the broad road was crossed. the lane began, smoky and dark. women in shawls and men's tweed caps hurried by. men hung over the palings; the children played in the doorways. a low hum came from the mean little cottages. in some of them there was a flicker of light, and a shadow, crab-like, moved across the window. laura bent her head and hurried on. she wished now she had put on a coat. how her frock shone! and the big hat with the velvet streamer - if only it was another hat! were the people looking at her? they must be. it was a mistake to have come; she knew all along it was a mistake. should she go back even now?no, too late. this was the house. it must be. a dark knot of people stood outside. beside the gate an old, old woman with a crutch sat in a chair, watching. she had her feet on a newspaper. the voices stopped as laura drew near. the group parted. it was as though she was expected, as though they had known she was coming here.laura was terribly nervous. tossing the velvet ribbon over her shoulder, she said to a woman standing by, "is this mrs. scott's house?" and the woman, smiling queerly, said, "it is, my lass."oh, to be away from this! she actually said, "help me, god," as she walked up the tiny path and knocked. to be away from those staring eyes, or to be covered up in anything, one of those women's shawls even. i'll just leave the basket and go, she decided. i shan't even wait for it to be emptied.then the door opened. a little woman in black showed in the gloom.laura said, "are you mrs. scott?" but to her horror the woman answered, "walk in please, miss," and she was shut in the passage."no," said laura, "i don't want to come in. i only want to leave this basket. mother sent--"the little woman in the gloomy passage seemed not to have heard her. "step this way, please, miss," she said in an oily voice, and laura followed her.she found herself in a wretched little low kitchen, lighted by a smoky lamp. there was a woman sitting before the fire."em," said the little creature who had let her in. "em! it's a young lady." she turned to laura. she said meaningly, "i'm 'er sister, miss. you'll excuse 'er, won't you?""oh, but of course!" said laura. "please, please don't disturb her. i - i only want to leave--"but at that moment the woman at the fire turned round. her face, puffed up, red, with swollen eyes and swollen lips, looked terrible. she seemed as though she couldn't understand why laura was there. what did it mean? why was this stranger standing in the kitchen with a basket? what was it all about? and the poor face puckered up again."all right, my dear," said the other. "i'll thenk the young lady."and again she began, "you'll excuse her, miss, i'm sure," and her face, swollen too, tried an oily smile.laura only wanted to get out, to get away. she was back in the passage. the door opened. she walked straight through into the bedroom, where the dead man was lying."you'd like a look at 'im, wouldn't you?" said em's sister, and she brushed past laura over to the bed. "don't be afraid, my lass," - and now her voice sounded fond and sly, and fondly she drew down the sheet--"'e looks a picture. there's nothing to show. come along, my dear."laura came.there lay a young man, fast asleep - sleeping so soundly, so deeply, that he was far, far away from them both. oh, so remote, so peaceful. he was dreaming. never wake him up again. his head was sunk in the pillow, his eyes were closed; they were blind under the closed eyelids. he was given up to his dream. what did garden-parties and baskets and lace frocks matter to him? he was far from all those things. he was wonderful, beautiful. while they were laughing and while the band was playing, this marvel had come to the lane. happy ... happy ... all is well, said that sleeping face. this is just as it should be. i am content.but all the same you had to cry, and she couldn't go out of the room without saying something to him. laura gave a loud childish sob."forgive my hat," she said.and this time she didn't wait for em's sister. she found her way out of the door, down the path, past all those dark people. at the corner of the lane she met laurie.he stepped out of the shadow. "is that you, laura?""yes.""mother was getting anxious. was it all right?""yes, quite. oh, laurie!" she took his arm, she pressed up against him."i say, you're not crying, are you?" asked her brother.laura shook her head. she was.laurie put his arm round her shoulder. "don't cry," he said in his warm, loving voice. "was it awful?""no," sobbed laura. "it was simply marvellous. but laurie--" she stopped, she looked at her brother. "isn't life," she stammered, "isn't life--" but what life was she couldn't explain. no matter. he quite understood."isn't it, darling?" said laurie.it seemed to the little crowd on the wharf that she was never going to move again. there she lay, immense, motionless on the grey crinkled water, a loop of smoke above her, an immense flock of gulls screaming and diving after the galley droppings at the stern. you could just see little couples parading - little flies walking up and down the dish on the grey crinkled tablecloth. other flies clustered and swarmed at the edge. now there was a gleam of white on the lower deck - the cook's apron or the stewardess perhaps. now a tiny black spider raced up the ladder on to the bridge.in the front of the crowd a strong-looking, middle-aged man, dressed very well, very snugly in a grey overcoat, grey silk scarf, thick gloves and dark felt hat, marched up and down, twirling his folded umbrella. he seemed to be the leader of the little crowd on the wharf and at the same time to keep them together. he was something between the sheep-dog and the shepherd.but what a fool - what a fool he had been not to bring any glasses! there wasn't a pair of glasses between the whole lot of them."curious thing, mr. scott, that none of us thought of glasses. we might have been able to stir 'em up a bit. we might have managed a little signalling. 'don't hesitate to land. natives harmless.' or: 'a welcome awaits you. all is forgiven.' what? eh?"mr. hammond's quick, eager glance, so nervous and yet so friendly and confiding, took in everybody on the wharf, roped in even those old chaps lounging against the gangways. they knew, every man-jack of them, that mrs. hammond was on that boat, and that he was so tremendously excited it never entered his head not to believe that this marvellous fact meant something to them too. it warmed his heart towards them. they were, he decided, as decent a crowd of people - those old chaps over by the gangways, too - fine, solid old chaps. what chests - by jove! and he squared his own, plunged his thick-gloved hands into his pockets, rocked from heel to toe."yes, my wife's been in europe for the last ten months. on a visit to our eldest girl, who was married last year. i brought her up here, as far as salisbury, myself. so i thought i'd better come and fetch her back. yes, yes, yes." the shrewd grey eyes narrowed again and searched anxiously, quickly, the motionless liner. again his overcoat was unbuttoned. out came the thin, butter-yellow watch again, and for the twentieth - fiftieth - hundredth time he made the calculation."let me see now. it was two fifteen when the doctor's launch went off. two fifteen. it is now exactly twenty-eight minutes past four. that is to say, the doctor's been gone two hours and thirteen minutes. two hours and thirteen minutes! whee-ooh!" he gave a queer little half-whistle and snapped his watch to again. "but i think we should have been told if there was anything up - don't you, mr. gaven?""oh, yes, mr. hammond! i don't think there's anything to - anything to worry about," said mr. gaven, knocking out his pipe against the heel of his shoe. "at the same time--""quite so! quite so!" cried mr. hammond. "dashed annoying!" he paced quickly up and down and came back again to his stand between mr. and mrs. scott and mr. gaven. "it's getting quite dark, too," and he waved his folded umbrella as though the dusk at least might have had the decency to keep off for a bit. but the dusk came slowly, spreading like a slow stain over the water. little jean scott dragged at her mother's hand."i wan' my tea, mammy!" she wailed."i expect you do," said mr. hammond. "i expect all these ladies want their tea." and his kind, flushed, almost pitiful glance roped them all in again. he wondered whether janey was having a final cup of tea in the saloon out there. he hoped so; he thought not. it would be just like her not to leave the deck. in that case perhaps the deck steward would bring her up a cup. if he'd been there he'd have got it for her - somehow. and for a moment he was on deck, standing over her, watching her little hand fold round the cup in the way she had, while she drank the only cup of tea to be got on board ... but now he was back here, and the lord only knew when that cursed captain would stop hanging about in the stream. he took another turn, up and down, up and down. he walked as far as the cab-stand to make sure his driver hadn't disappeared; back he swerved again to the little flock huddled in the shelter of the banana crates. little jean scott was still wanting her tea. poor little beggar! he wished he had a bit of chocolate on him."here, jean!" he said. "like a lift up?" and easily, gently, he swung the little girl on to a higher barrel. the movement of holding her, steadying her, relieved him wonderfully, lightened his heart."hold on," he said, keeping an arm round her."oh, don't worry about jean, mr. hammond!" said mrs. scott."that's all right, mrs. scott. no trouble. it's a pleasure. jean's a little pal of mine, aren't you, jean?""yes, mr. hammond," said jean, and she ran her finger down the dent of his felt hat.but suddenly she caught him by the ear and gave a loud scream. "lo-ok, mr. hammond! she's moving! look, she's coming in!"by jove! so she was. at last! she was slowly, slowly turning round. a bell sounded far over the water and a great spout of steam gushed into the air. the gulls rose; they fluttered away like bits of white paper. and whether that deep throbbing was her engines or his heart mr. hammond couldn't say. he had to nerve himself to bear it, whatever it was. at that moment old captain johnson, the harbour-master, came striding down the wharf, a leather portfolio under his arm."jean'll be all right," said mr. scott. "i'll hold her." he was just in time. mr. hammond had forgotten about jean. he sprang away to greet old captain johnson."well, captain," the eager, nervous voice rang out again, "you've taken pity on us at last.""it's no good blaming me, mr. hammond," wheezed old captain johnson, staring at the liner. "you got mrs. hammond on board, ain't yer?""yes, yes!" said hammond, and he kept by the harbour-master's side. "mrs. hammond's there. hul-lo! we shan't be long now!"with her telephone ring-ringing, the thrum of her screw filling the air, the big liner bore down on them, cutting sharp through the dark water so that big white shavings curled to either side. hammond and the harbour-master kept in front of the rest. hammond took off his hat; he raked the decks - they were crammed with passengers; he waved his hat and bawled a loud, strange "hul-lo!" across the water; and then turned round and burst out laughing and said something - nothing - to old captain johnson."seen her?" asked the harbour-master."no, not yet. steady - wait a bit!" and suddenly, between two great clumsy idiots - "get out of the way there!" he signed with his umbrella - he saw a hand raised - a white glove shaking a handkerchief. another moment, and - thank god, thank god! - there she was. there was janey. there was mrs. hammond, yes, yes, yes - standing by the rail and smiling and nodding and waving her handkerchief."well that's first class - first class! well, well, well!" he positively stamped. like lightning he drew out his cigar-case and offered it to old captain johnson. "have a cigar, captain! they're pretty good. have a couple! here" - and he pressed all the cigars in the case on the harbour-master - "i've a couple of boxes up at the hotel.""thenks, mr. hammond!" wheezed old captain johnson.hammond stuffed the cigar-case back. his hands were shaking, but he'd got hold of himself again. he was able to face janey. there she was, leaning on the rail, talking to some woman and at the same time watching him, ready for him. it struck him, as the gulf of water closed, how small she looked on that huge ship. his heart was wrung with such a spasm that he could have cried out. how little she looked to have come all that long way and back by herself! just like her, though. just like janey. she had the courage of a - and now the crew had come forward and parted the passengers; they had lowered the rails for the gangways.the voices on shore and the voices on board flew to greet each other."all well?""all well.""how's mother?""much better.""hullo, jean!""hillo, aun' emily!""had a good voyage?""splendid!""shan't be long now!""not long now."the engines stopped. slowly she edged to the wharf-side."make way there - make way - make way!" and the wharf hands brought the heavy gangways along at a sweeping run. hammond signed to janey to stay where she was. the old harbour-master stepped forward; he followed. as to "ladies first," or any rot like that, it never entered his head."after you, captain!" he cried genially. and, treading on the old man's heels, he strode up the gangway on to the deck in a bee-line to janey, and janey was clasped in his arms."well, well, well! yes, yes! here we are at last!" he stammered. it was all he could say. and janey emerged, and her cool little voice - the only voice in the world for him - said,"well, darling! have you been waiting long?"no; not long. or, at any rate, it didn't matter. it was over now. but the point was, he had a cab waiting at the end of the wharf. was she ready to go off. was her luggage ready? in that case they could cut off sharp with her cabin luggage and let the rest go hang until to-morrow. he bent over her and she looked up with her familiar half-smile. she was just the same. not a day changed. just as he'd always known her. she laid her small hand on his sleeve."how are the children, john?" she asked.(hang the children!) "perfectly well. never better in their lives.""haven't they sent me letters?""yes, yes - of course! i've left them at the hotel for you to digest later on.""we can't go quite so fast," said she. "i've got people to say good-bye to - and then there's the captain." as his face fell she gave his arm a small understanding squeeze. "if the captain comes off the bridge i want you to thank him for having looked after your wife so beautifully." well, he'd got her. if she wanted another ten minutes - as he gave way she was surrounded. the whole first-class seemed to want to say good-bye to janey."good-bye, dear mrs. hammond! and next time you're in sydney i'll expect you.""darling mrs. hammond! you won't forget to write to me, will you?""well, mrs. hammond, what this boat would have been without you!"it was as plain as a pikestaff that she was by far the most popular woman on board. and she took it all - just as usual. absolutely composed. just her little self - just janey all over; standing there with her veil thrown back. hammond never noticed what his wife had on. it was all the same to him whatever she wore. but to-day he did notice that she wore a black "costume" - didn't they call it? - with white frills, trimmings he supposed they were, at the neck and sleeves. all this while janey handed him round."john, dear!" and then: "i want to introduce you to--"finally they did escape, and she led the way to her state-room. to follow janey down the passage that she knew so well - that was so strange to him; to part the green curtains after her and to step into the cabin that had been hers gave him exquisite happiness. but - confound it! - the stewardess was there on the floor, strapping up the rugs."that's the last, mrs. hammond," said the stewardess, rising and pulling down her cuffs.he was introduced again, and then janey and the stewardess disappeared into the passage. he heard whisperings. she was getting the tipping business over, he supposed. he sat down on the striped sofa and took his hat off. there were the rugs she had taken with her; they looked good as new. all her luggage looked fresh, perfect. the labels were written in her beautiful little clear hand - "mrs. john hammond.""mrs. john hammond!" he gave a long sigh of content and leaned back, crossing his arms. the strain was over. he felt he could have sat there for ever sighing his relief - the relief at being rid of that horrible tug, pull, grip on his heart. the danger was over. that was the feeling. they were on dry land again.but at that moment janey's head came round the corner."darling - do you mind? i just want to go and say good-bye to the doctor."hammond started up. "i'll come with you.""no, no!" she said. "don't bother. i'd rather not. i'll not be a minute."and before he could answer she was gone. he had half a mind to run after her; but instead he sat down again.would she really not be long? what was the time now? out came the watch; he stared at nothing. that was rather queer of janey, wasn't it? why couldn't she have told the stewardess to say good-bye for her? why did she have to go chasing after the ship's doctor? she could have sent a note from the hotel even if the affair had been urgent. urgent? did it - could it mean that she had been ill on the voyage - she was keeping something from him? that was it! he seized his hat. he was going off to find that fellow and to wring the truth out of him at all costs. he thought he'd noticed just something. she was just a touch too calm - too steady. from the very first moment -the curtains rang. janey was back. he jumped to his feet."janey, have you been ill on this voyage? you have!""ill?" her airy little voice mocked him. she stepped over the rugs, and came up close, touched his breast, and looked up at him."darling," she said, "don't frighten me. of course i haven't! whatever makes you think i have? do i look ill?"but hammond didn't see her. he only felt that she was looking at him and that there was no need to worry about anything. she was here to look after things. it was all right. everything was.the gentle pressure of her hand was so calming that he put his over hers to hold it there. and she said:"stand still. i want to look at you. i haven't seen you yet. you've had your beard beautifully trimmed, and you look - younger, i think, and decidedly thinner! bachelor life agrees with you.""agrees with me!" he groaned for love and caught her close again. and again, as always, he had the feeling that he was holding something that never was quite his - his. something too delicate, too precious, that would fly away once he let go."for god's sake let's get off to the hotel so that we can be by ourselves!" and he rang the bell hard for some one to look sharp with the luggage.* * *walking down the wharf together she took his arm. he had her on his arm again. and the difference it made to get into the cab after janey - to throw the red- and-yellow striped blanket round them both - to tell the driver to hurry because neither of them had had any tea. no more going without his tea or pouring out his own. she was back. he turned to her, squeezed her hand, and said gently, teasingly, in the "special" voice he had for her: "glad to be home again, dearie?" she smiled; she didn't even bother to answer, but gently she drew his hand away as they came to the brighter streets."we've got the best room in the hotel," he said. "i wouldn't be put off with another. and i asked the chambermaid to put in a bit of a fire in case you felt chilly. she's a nice, attentive girl. and i thought now we were here we wouldn't bother to go home to-morrow, but spend the day looking round and leave the morning after. does that suit you? there's no hurry, is there? the children will have you soon enough ... i thought a day's sight-seeing might make a nice break in your journey - eh, janey?""have you taken the tickets for the day after?" she asked."i should think i have!" he unbuttoned his overcoat and took out his bulging pocket-book. "here we are! i reserved a first-class carriage to cooktown. there it is - 'mr. and mrs. john hammond.' i thought we might as well do ourselves comfortably, and we don't want other people butting in, do we? but if you'd like to stop here a bit longer--?""oh, no!" said janey quickly. "not for the world! the day after to-morrow, then. and the children--"but they had reached the hotel. the manager was standing in the broad, brilliantly-lighted porch. he came down to greet them. a porter ran from the hall for their boxes."well, mr. arnold, here's mrs. hammond at last!"the manager led them through the hall himself and pressed the elevator-bell. hammond knew there were business pals of his sitting at the little hall tables having a drink before dinner. but he wasn't going to risk interruption; he looked neither to the right nor the left. they could think what they pleased. if they didn't understand, the more fools they - and he stepped out of the lift, unlocked the door of their room, and shepherded janey in. the door shut. now, at last, they were alone together. he turned up the light. the curtains were drawn; the fire blazed. he flung his hat on to the huge bed and went towards her.but - would you believe it! - again they were interrupted. this time it was the porter with the luggage. he made two journeys of it, leaving the door open in between, taking his time, whistling through his teeth in the corridor. hammond paced up and down the room, tearing off his gloves, tearing off his scarf. finally he flung his overcoat on to the bedside.at last the fool was gone. the door clicked. now they were alone. said hammond: "i feel i'll never have you to myself again. these cursed people! janey" - and he bent his flushed, eager gaze upon her - "let's have dinner up here. if we go down to the restaurant we'll be interrupted, and then there's the confounded music" (the music he'd praised so highly, applauded so loudly last night!). "we shan't be able to hear each other speak. let's have something up here in front of the fire. it's too late for tea. i'll order a little supper, shall i? how does that idea strike you?""do, darling!" said janey. "and while you're away - the children's letters--""oh, later on will do!" said hammond."but then we'd get it over," said janey. "and i'd first have time to--""oh, i needn't go down!" explained hammond. "i'll just ring and give the order ... you don't want to send me away, do you?"janey shook her head and smiled."but you're thinking of something else. you're worrying about something," said hammond. "what is it? come and sit here - come and sit on my knee before the fire.""i'll just unpin my hat," said janey, and she went over to the dressing-table. "a-ah!" she gave a little cry."what is it?""nothing, darling. i've just found the children's letters. that's all right! they will keep. no hurry now!" she turned to him, clasping them. she tucked them into her frilled blouse. she cried quickly, gaily: "oh, how typical this dressing-table is of you!""why? what's the matter with it?" said hammond."if it were floating in eternity i should say 'john!'" laughed janey, staring at the big bottle of hair tonic, the wicker bottle of eau-de-cologne, the two hair- brushes, and a dozen new collars tied with pink tape. "is this all your luggage?""hang my luggage!" said hammond; but all the same he liked being laughed at by janey. "let's talk. let's get down to things. tell me" - and as janey perched on his knees he leaned back and drew her into the deep, ugly chair - "tell me you're really glad to be back, janey.""yes, darling, i am glad," she said.but just as when he embraced her he felt she would fly away, so hammond never knew - never knew for dead certain that she was as glad as he was. how could he know? would he ever know? would he always have this craving - this pang like hunger, somehow, to make janey so much part of him that there wasn't any of her to escape? he wanted to blot out everybody, everything. he wished now he'd turned off the light. that might have brought her nearer. and now those letters from the children rustled in her blouse. he could have chucked them into the fire."janey," he whispered."yes, dear?" she lay on his breast, but so lightly, so remotely. their breathing rose and fell together."janey!""what is it?""turn to me," he whispered. a slow, deep flush flowed into his forehead. "kiss me, janey! you kiss me!"it seemed to him there was a tiny pause - but long enough for him to suffer torture - before her lips touched his, firmly, lightly - kissing them as she always kissed him, as though the kiss - how could he describe it? - confirmed what they were saying, signed the contract. but that wasn't what he wanted; that wasn't at all what he thirsted for. he felt suddenly, horrible tired."if you knew," he said, opening his eyes, "what it's been like - waiting to-day. i thought the boat never would come in. there we were, hanging about. what kept you so long?"she made no answer. she was looking away from him at the fire. the flames hurried - hurried over the coals, flickered, fell."not asleep, are you?" said hammond, and he jumped her up and down."no," she said. and then: "don't do that, dear. no, i was thinking. as a matter of fact," she said, "one of the passengers died last night - a man. that's what held us up. we brought him in - i mean, he wasn't buried at sea. so, of course, the ship's doctor and the shore doctor--""what was it?" asked hammond uneasily. he hated to hear of death. he hated this to have happened. it was, in some queer way, as though he and janey had met a funeral on their way to the hotel."oh, it wasn't anything in the least infectious!" said janey. she was speaking scarcely above her breath. "it was heart." a pause. "poor fellow!" she said. "quite young." and she watched the fire flicker and fall. "he died in my arms," said janey.the blow was so sudden that hammond thought he would faint. he couldn't move; he couldn't breathe. he felt all his strength flowing - flowing into the big dark chair, and the big dark chair held him fast, gripped him, forced him to bear it."what?" he said dully. "what's that you say?""the end was quite peaceful," said the small voice. "he just" - and hammond saw her lift her gentle hand - "breathed his life away at the end." and her hand fell."who - else was there?" hammond managed to ask."nobody. i was alone with him."ah, my god, what was she saying! what was she doing to him! this would kill him! and all the while she spoke:"i saw the change coming and i sent the steward for the doctor, but the doctor was too late. he couldn't have done anything, anyway.""but - why you, why you?" moaned hammond.at that janey turned quickly, quickly searched his face."you don't mind, john, do you?" she asked. "you don't - it's nothing to do with you and me."somehow or other he managed to shake some sort of smile at her. somehow or other he stammered: "no - go - on, go on! i want you to tell me.""but, john darling--""tell me, janey!""there's nothing to tell," she said, wondering. "he was one of the first-class passengers. i saw he was very ill when he came on board ... but he seemed to be so much better until yesterday. he had a severe attack in the afternoon - excitement - nervousness, i think, about arriving. and after that he never recovered.""but why didn't the stewardess--""oh, my dear - the stewardess!" said janey. "what would he have felt? and besides ... he might have wanted to leave a message ... to--""didn't he?" muttered hammond. "didn't he say anything?""no, darling, not a word!" she shook her head softly. "all the time i was with him he was too weak ... he was too weak even to move a finger ..."janey was silent. but her words, so light, so soft, so chill, seemed to hover in the air, to rain into his breast like snow.the fire had gone red. now it fell in with a sharp sound and the room was colder. cold crept up his arms. the room was huge, immense, glittering. it filled his whole world. there was the great blind bed, with his coat flung across it like some headless man saying his prayers. there was the luggage, ready to be carried away again, anywhere, tossed into trains, carted on to boats.... "he was too weak. he was too weak to move a finger." and yet he died in janey's arms. she - who'd never - never once in all these years - never on one single solitary occasion--no; he mustn't think of it. madness lay in thinking of it. no, he wouldn't face it. he couldn't stand it. it was too much to bear!and now janey touched his tie with her fingers. she pinched the edges of the tie together."you're not - sorry i told you, john darling? it hasn't made you sad? it hasn't spoilt our evening - our being alone together?"but at that he had to hide his face. he put his face into her bosom and his arms enfolded her.spoilt their evening! spoilt their being alone together! they would never be alone together again.all of a sudden she noticed that her beauty had fallen all apart on her, that it had begun to pain her physically like a tumor or a cancer. she still remembered the weight of the privilege she had borne over her body during adolescence, which she had dropped now--who knows where?--with the weariness of resignation, with the final gesture of a declining creature. it was impossible to bear that burden any longer. she had to drop that useless attribute of her personality somewhere; as she turned a corner, somewhere in the outskirts. or leave it behind on the coatrack of a second-rate restaurant like some old useless coat. she was tired of being the center of attention, of being under siege from men's long looks. at night, when insomnia stuck its pins into her eyes, she would have liked to be an ordinary woman, without any special attraction. everything was hostile to her within the four walls of her room. desperate, she could feel her vigil spreading out under her skin, into her head, pushing the fever upward toward the roots of her hair. it was as if her arteries had become peopled with hot, tiny insects who, with the approach of dawn, awoke each day and ran about on their moving feet in a rending subcutaneous adventure in that place of clay made fruit where her anatomical beauty had found its home. in vain she struggled to chase those terrible creatures away. she couldn't. they were part of her own organism. they'd been there, alive, since much before her physical existence. they came from the heart of her father, who had fed them painfully during his nights of desperate solitude. or maybe they had poured into her arteries through the cord that linked her to her mother ever since the beginning of the world. there was no doubt that those insects had not been born spontaneously inside her body. she knew that they came from back there, that all who bore her surname had to bear them, had to suffer them as she did when insomnia held unconquerable sway until dawn. it was those very insects who painted that bitter expression, that unconsolable sadness on the faces of her forebears. she had seen them looking out of their extinguished existence, out of their ancient portraits, victims of that same anguish. she still remembered the disquieting face of the greatgrandmother who, from her aged canvas, begged for a minute of rest, a second of peace from those insects who there, in the channels of her blood, kept on martyrizing her, pitilessly beautifying her. no. those insects didn't belong to her. they came, transmitted from generation to generation, sustaining with their tiny armor all the prestige of a select caste, a painfully select group. those insects had been born in the womb of the first woman who had had a beautiful daughter. but it was necessary, urgent, to put a stop to that heritage. someone must renounce the eternal transmission of that artificial beauty. it was no good for women of her breed to admire themselves as they came back from their mirrors if during the night those creatures did their slow, effective, ceaseless work with a constancy of centuries. it was no longer beauty, it was a sickness that had to be halted, that had to be cut off in some bold and radical way.she still remembered the endless hours spent on that bed sown with hot needles. those nights when she tried to speed time along so that with the arrival of daylight the beasts would stop hurting her. what good was beauty like that? night after night, sunken in her desperation, she thought it would have been better for her to have been an ordinary woman, or a man. but that useless virtue was denied her, fed by insects of remote origin who were hastening the irrevocable arrival of her death. maybe she would have been happy if she had had the same lack of grace, that same desolate ugliness, as her czechoslovakian friend who had a dog's name. she would have been better off ugly, so that she could sleep peacefully like any other christian.she cursed her ancestors. they were to blame for her insomnia. they had transmitted that exact, invariable beauty, as if after death mothers shook and renewed their heads in order to graft them onto the trunks of their daughters. it was as if the same head, a single head, had been continuously transmitted, with the same ears, the same nose, the identical mouth, with its weighty intelligence, to all the women who were to receive it irremediably like a painful inheritance of beauty. it was there, in the transmission of the head, that the eternal microbe that came through across generations had been accentuated, had taken on personality, strength, until it became an invincible being, an incurable illness, which upon reaching her, after having passed through a complicated process of judgment, could no longer be borne and was bitter and painful . . . just like a tumor or a cancer.it was during those hours of wakefulness that she remembered the things disagreeable to her fine sensibility. she remembered the objects that made up the sentimental universe where, as in a chemical stew, those microbes of despair had been cultivated. during those nights, with her big round eyes open and frightened, she bore the weight of the darkness that fell upon her temples like molten lead. everything was asleep around her. and from her corner, in order to bring on sleep, she tried to go back over her childhood memories.but that remembering always ended with a terror of the unknown. always, after wandering through the dark corners of the house, her thoughts would find themselves face to face with fear. then the struggle would begin. the real struggle against three unmovable enemies. she would never--no, she would never--be able to shake the fear from her head. she would have to bear it as it clutched at her throat. and all just to live in that ancient mansion, to sleep alone in that corner, away from the rest of the world.her thoughts always went down along the damp, dark passageways, shaking the dry cobweb-covered dust off the portraits. that disturbing and fearsome dust that fell from above, from the place where the bones of her ancestors were falling apart. invariably she remembered the "boy." she imagined him there, sleepwalking under the grass in the courtyard beside the orange tree, a handful of wet earth in his mouth. she seemed to see him in his clay depths, digging upward with his nails, his teeth, fleeing the cold that bit into his back, looking for the exit into the courtyard through that small tunnel where they had placed him along with the snails. in winter she would hear him weeping with his tiny sob, mud-covered, drenched with rain. she imagined him intact. just as they had left him five years before in that water-filled hole. she couldn't think of him as having decomposed. on the contrary, he was probably most handsome sailing along in that thick water as on a voyage with no escape. or she saw him alive but frightened, afraid of feeling himself alone, buried in such a somber courtyard. she herself had been against their leaving him there, under the orange tree, so close to the house. she was afraid of him. she knew that on nights when insomnia hounded her he would sense it. he would come back along the wide corridors to ask her to stay with him, ask her to defend him against those other insects, who were eating at the roots of his violets. he would come back to have her let him sleep beside her as he did when he was alive. she was afraid of feeling him beside her again after he had leaped over the wall of death. she was afraid of stealing those hands that the "boy" would always keep closed to warm up his little piece of ice. she wished, after she saw him turned into cement, like the statue of fear fallen in the mud, she wished that they would take him far away so that she wouldn't remember him at night. and yet they had left him there, where he was imperturbable now, wretched, feeding his blood with the mud of earthworms. and she had to resign herself to seeing him return from the depths of his shadows. because always, invariably, when she lay awake she began to think about the "boy," who must be calling her from his piece of earth to help him flee that absurd death.but now, in her new life, temporal and spaceless, she was more tranquil. she knew that outside her world there, everything would keep going on with the same rhythm as before; that her room would still be sunken in early-morning darkness, and her things, her furniture, her thirteen favorite books, all in place. and that on her unoccupied bed, the body aroma that filled the void of what had been a whole woman was only now beginning to evaporate. but how could "that" happen? how could she, after being a beautiful woman, her blood peopled by insects, pursued by the fear of the total night, have the immense, wakeful nightmare now of entering a strange, unknown world where all dimensions had been eliminated? she remembered. that night--the night of her passage--had been colder than usual and she was alone in the house, martyrized by insomnia. no one disturbed the silence, and the smell that came from the garden was a smell of fear. sweat broke out on her body as if the blood in her arteries were pouring out its cargo of insects. she wanted someone to pass by on the street, someone who would shout, would shatter that halted atmosphere. for something to move in nature, for the earth to move around the sun again. but it was useless.there was no waking up even for those imbecilic men who had fallen asleep under her ear, inside the pillow. she, too, was motionless. the walls gave off a strong smell of fresh paint, that thick, grand smell that you don't smell with your nose but with your stomach. and on the table the single clock, pounding on the silence with its mortal machinery. "time . . . oh, time!" she sighed, remembering death. and there in the courtyard, under the orange tree, the "boy" was still weeping with his tiny sob from the other world.she took refuge in all her beliefs. why didn't it dawn right then and there or why didn't she die once and for all? she had never thought that beauty would cost her so many sacrifices. at that moment--as usual--it still pained her on top of her fear. and underneath her fear those implacable insects were still martyrizing her. death had squeezed her into life like a spider, biting her in a rage, ready to make her succumb. but the final moment was taking its time. her hands, those hands that men squeezed like imbeciles with manifest animal nervousness, were motionless, paralyzed by fear, by that irrational terror that came from within, with no motive, just from knowing that she was abandoned in that ancient house. she tried to react and couldn't. fear had absorbed her completely and remained there, fixed, tenacious, almost corporeal, as if it were some invisible person who had made up his mind not to leave her room. and the most upsetting part was that the fear had no justification at all, that it was a unique fear, without any reason, a fear just because.the saliva had grown thick on her tongue. that hard gum that stuck to her palate and flowed because she was unable to contain it was bothersome between her teeth. it was a desire that was quite different from thirst. a superior desire that she was feeling for the first time in her life. for a moment she forgot about her beauty, her insomnia, and her irrational fear. she didn't recognize herself. for an instant she thought that the microbes had left her body. she felt that they'd come out stuck to her saliva. yes, that was all very fine. it was fine that the insects no longer occupied her and that she could sleep now, but she had to find a way to dissolve that resin that dulled her tongue. if she could only get to the pantry and . . . but what was she thinking about? she gave a start of surprise. she'd never felt "that desire." the urgency of the acidity had debilitated her, rendering useless the discipline that she had faithfully followed for so many years ever since the day they had buried the "boy." it was foolish, but she felt revulsion about eating an orange. she knew that the "boy" had climbed up to the orange blossoms and that the fruit of next autumn would be swollen with his flesh, cooled by the coolness of his death. no. she couldn't eat them. she knew that under every orange tree in the world there was a boy buried, sweetening the fruit with the lime of his bones. nevertheless, she had to eat an orange now. it was the only thing for that gum that was smothering her. it was the foolishness to think that the "boy" was inside a fruit. she would take advantage of that moment in which beauty had stopped paining her to get to the pantry. but wasn't that strange? it was the first time in her life that she'd felt a real urge to eat an orange. she became happy, happy. oh, what pleasure! eating an orange. she didn't know why, but she'd never had such a demanding desire. she would get up, happy to be a normal woman again, singing merrily until she got to the pantry, singing merrily like a new woman, newborn. she would, even get to the courtyard and . . .her memory was suddenly cut off. she remembered that she had tried to get up and that she was no longer in her bed, that her body had disappeared, that her thirteen favorite books were no longer there, that she was no longer she, now that she was bodiless, floating, drifting over an absolute nothingness, changed into an amorphous dot, tiny, lacking direction. she was unable to pinpoint what had happened. she was confused. she just had the sensation that someone had pushed her into space from the top of a precipice. she felt changed into an abstract, imaginary being. she felt changed into an in corporeal woman, something like her suddenly having entered that high and unknown world of pure spirits.she was afraid again. but it was a different fear from what she had felt a moment before. it was no longer the fear of the "boy" 's weeping. it was a terror of the strange, of what was mysterious and unknown in her new world. and to think that all of it had happened so innocently, with so much naivete on her part. what would she tell her mother when she told her what had happened when she got home? she began to think about how alarmed the neighbors would be when they opened the door to her bedroom and discovered that the bed was empty, that the locks had not been touched, that no one had been able to enter or to leave, and that, nonetheless, she wasn't there. she imagined her mother's desperate movements as she searched through the room, conjecturing, wondering "what could have become of that girl?" the scene was clear to her. the neighbors would arrive and begin to weave comments together--some of them malicious--concerning her disappearance. each would think according to his own and particular way of thinking. each would try to offer the most logical explanation, the most acceptable, at least, while her mother would run along all the corridors in the big house, desperate, calling her by name.and there she would be. she would contemplate the moment, detail by detail, from a corner, from the ceiling, from the chinks in the wall, from anywhere; from the best angle, shielded by her bodiless state, in her spacelessness. it bothered her, thinking about it. now she realized her mistake. she wouldn't be able to give any explanation, clear anything up, console anybody. no living being could be informed of her transformation. now--perhaps the only time that she needed them--she wouldn't have a mouth, arms, so that everybody could know that she was there, in her corner, separated from the three-dimensional world by an unbridgeable distance. in her new life she was isolated, completely prevented from grasping emotions. but at every moment something was vibrating in her, a shudder that ran through her, overwhelming her, making her aware of that other physical universe that moved outside her world. she couldn't hear, she couldn't see, but she knew about that sound and that sight. and there, in the heights of her superior world, she began to know that an environment of anguish surrounded her.just a moment before--according to our temporal world-she had made the passage, so that only now was she beginning to know the peculiarities, the characteristics, of her new world. around her an absolute, radical darkness spun. how long would that darkness last? would she have to get used to it for eternity? her anguish grew from her concentration as she saw herself sunken in that thick impenetrable fog: could she be in limbo? she shuddered. she remembered everything she had heard about limbo. if she really was there, floating beside her were other pure spirits, those of children who had died without baptism, who had been dying for a thousand years. in the darkness she tried to find next to her those beings who must have been much purer, ever so much simpler, than she. completely isolated from the physical world, condemned to a sleepwalking and eternal life. maybe the "boy" was there looking for an exit that would lead him to his body.but no. why should she be in limbo? had she died, perhaps? no. it was simply a change in state, a normal passage from the physical world to an easier, uncomplicated world, where all dimensions had been eliminated.now she would not have to bear those subterranean insects. her beauty had collapsed on her. now, in that elemental situation, she could be happy. although--oh!--not completely happy, because now her greatest desire, the desire to eat an orange, had become impossible. it was the only thing that might have caused her still to want to be in her first life. to be able to satisfy the urgency of the acidity that still persisted after the passage. she tried to orient herself so as to reach the pantry and feel, if nothing else, the cool and sour company of the oranges. it was then that she discovered a new characteristic of her world: she was everywhere in the house, in the courtyard, on the roof, even in the "boy"'s orange tree. she was in the whole physical world there beyond. and yet she was nowhere. she became upset again. she had lost control over herself. now she was under a superior will, she was a useless being, absurd, good for nothing. without knowing why, she began to feel sad. she almost began to feel nostalgia for her beauty: for the beauty that had foolishly ruined her.but one supreme idea reanimated her. hadn't she heard, perhaps, that pure spirits can penetrate any body at will? after all, what harm was there in trying? she attempted to remember what inhabitant of the house could be put to the proof. if she could fulfill her aim she would be satisfied: she could eat the orange. she remembered. at that time the servants were usually not there. her mother still hadn't arrived. but the need to eat an orange, joined now to the curiosity of seeing herself incarnate in a body different from her own, obliged her to act at once. and yet there was no one there in whom she could incarnate herself. it was a desolating bit of reason: there was nobody in the house. she would have to live eternally isolated from the outside world, in her undimensional world, unable to eat the first orange. and all because of a foolish thing. it would have been better to go on bearing up for a few more years under that hostile beauty and not wipe herself out forever, making herself useless, like a conquered beast. but it was too late.she was going to withdraw, disappointed, into a distant region of the universe, to a place where she could forget all her earthly desires. but something made her suddenly hold back. the promise of a better future had opened up in her unknown region. yes, there was someone in the house in whom she could reincarnate herself: the cat! then she hesitated. it was difficult to resign herself to live inside an animal. she would have soft, white fur, and a great energy for a leap would probably be concentrated in her muscles. and she would feel her eyes glow in the dark like two green coals. and she would have white, sharp teeth to smile at her mother from her feline heart with a broad and good animal smile. but no! it couldn't be. she imagined herself quickly inside the body of the cat, running through the corridors of the house once more, managing four uncomfortable legs, and that tail would move on its own, without rhythm, alien to her will. what would life look like through those green and luminous eyes? at night she would go to mew at the sky so that it would not pour its moonlit cement down on the face of the "boy," who would be on his back drinking in the dew. maybe in her status as a cat she would also feel fear. and maybe in the end, she would be unable to eat the orange with that carnivorous mouth. a coldness that came from right then and there, born of the very roots of her spirit quivered in her memory. no. it was impossible to incarnate herself in the cat. she was afraid of one day feeling in her palate in her throat in all her quadruped organism, the irrevocable desire to eat a mouse. probably when her spirit began to inhabit the cat's body she would no longer feel any desire to eat an orange but the repugnant and urgent desire to eat a mouse. she shuddered on thinking about it, caught between her teeth after the chase. she felt it struggling in its last attempts at escape, trying to free itself to get back to its hole again. no. anything but that. it was preferable to stay there for eternity in that distant and mysterious world of pure spirits.but it was difficult to resign herself to live forgotten forever. why did she have to feel the desire to eat a mouse? who would rule in that synthesis of woman and cat? would the primitive animal instinct of the body rule, or the pure will of the woman? the answer was crystal clear. there was no reason to be afraid. she would incarnate herself in the cat and would eat her desired orange. besides, she would be a strange being, a cat with the intelligence of a beautiful woman. she would be the center of all attention. . . . it was then, for the first time, that she understood that above all her virtues what was in command was the vanity of a metaphysical woman.like an insect on the alert which raises its antennae, she put her energy to work throughout the house in search of the cat. it must still be on top of the stove at that time, dreaming that it would wake up with a sprig of heliotrope between its teeth. but it wasn't there. she looked for it again, but she could no longer find the stove. the kitchen wasn't the same. the corners of the house were strange to her; they were no longer those dark corners full of cobwebs. the cat was nowhere to be found. she looked on the roof, in the trees, in the drains, under the bed, in the pantry. she found everything confused. where she expected to find the portraits of her ancestors again, she found only a bottle of arsenic. from there on she found arsenic all through the house, but the cat had disappeared. the house was no longer the same as before. what had happened to her things? why were her thirteen favorite books now covered with a thick coat of arsenic? she remembered the orange tree in the courtyard. she looked for it, and tried to find the "boy" again in his pit of water. but the orange tree wasn't in its place and the "boy" was nothing now but a handful of arsenic mixed with ashes underneath a heavy concrete platform. now she really was going to sleep. everything was different. and the house had a strong smell of arsenic that beat on her nostrils as if from the depths of a pharmacy.only then did she understand that three thousand years had passed since the day she had had a desire to eat the first orange.then she looked at me. i thought that she was looking at me for the first time. but then, when she turned around behind the lamp and i kept feeling her slippery and oily look in back of me, over my shoulder, i understood that it was i who was looking at her for the first time. i lit a cigarette. i took a drag on the harsh, strong smoke, before spinning in the chair, balancing on one of the rear legs. after that i saw her there, as if she'd been standing beside the lamp looking at me every night. for a few brief minutes that's all we did: look at each other. i looked from the chair, balancing on one of the rear legs. she stood, with a long and quiet hand on the lamp, looking at me. i saw her eyelids lighted up as on every night. it was then that i remembered the usual thing, when i said to her: "eyes of a blue dog." without taking her hand off the lamp she said to me: "that. we'll never forget that." she left the orbit, sighing: "eyes of a blue dog. i've written it everywhere."i saw her walk over to the dressing table. i watched her appear in the circular glass of the mirror looking at me now at the end of a back and forth of mathematical light. i watched her keep on looking at me with her great hot-coal eyes: looking at me while she opened the little box covered with pink mother of pearl. i saw her powder her nose. when she finished, she closed the box, stood up again, and walked over to the lamp once more, saying: "i'm afraid that someone is dreaming about this room and revealing my secrets." and over the flame she held the same long and tremulous hand that she had been warming before sitting down at the mirror. and she said: "you don't feel the cold." and i said to her: "sometimes." and she said to me: "you must feel it now." and then i understood why i couldn't have been alone in the seat. it was the cold that had been giving me the certainty of my solitude. "now i feel it," i said. "and it's strange because the night is quiet. maybe the sheet fell off." she didn't answer. again she began to move toward the mirror and i turned again in the chair, keeping my back to her. without seeing her, i knew what she was doing. i knew that she was sitting in front of the mirror again, seeing my back, which had had time to reach the depths of the mirror and be caught by her look, which had also had just enough time to reach the depths and return--before the hand had time to start the second turn--until her lips were anointed now with crimson, from the first turn of her hand in front of the mirror. i saw, opposite me, the smooth wall, which was like another blind mirror in which i couldn't see her--sitting behind me--but could imagine her where she probably was as if a mirror had been hung in place of the wall. "i see you," i told her. and on the wall i saw what was as if she had raised her eyes and had seen me with my back turned toward her from the chair, in the depths of the mirror, my face turned toward the wall. then i saw her lower her eyes again and remain with her eyes always on her brassiere, not talking. and i said to her again: "i see you." and she raised her eyes from her brassiere again. "that's impossible," she said. i asked her why. and she, with her eyes quiet and on her brassiere again: "because your face is turned toward the wall." then i spun the chair around. i had the cigarette clenched in my mouth. when i stayed facing the mirror she was back by the lamp. now she had her hands open over the flame, like the two wings of a hen, toasting herself, and with her face shaded by her own fingers. "i think i'm going to catch cold," she said. "this must be a city of ice." she turned her face to profile and her skin, from copper to red, suddenly became sad. "do something about it," she said. and she began to get undressed, item by item, starting at the top with the brassiere. i told her: "i'm going to turn back to the wall." she said: "no. in any case, you'll see me the way you did when your back was turned." and no sooner had she said it than she was almost completely undressed, with the flame licking her long copper skin. "i've always wanted to see you like that, with the skin of your belly full of deep pits, as if you'd been beaten." and before i realized that my words had become clumsy at the sight of her nakedness she became motionless, warming herself on the globe of the lamp, and she said: "sometimes i think i'm made of metal." she was silent for an instant. the position of her hands over the flame varied slightly. i said: "sometimes in other dreams, i've thought you were only a little bronze statue in the corner of some museum. maybe that's why you're cold." and she said: "sometimes, when i sleep on my heart, i can feel my body growing hollow and my skin is like plate. then, when the blood beats inside me, it's as if someone were calling by knocking on my stomach and i can feel my own copper sound in the bed. it's like--what do you call it--laminated metal." she drew closer to the lamp. "i would have liked to hear you," i said. and she said: "if we find each other sometime, put your ear to my ribs when i sleep on the left side and you'll hear me echoing. i've always wanted you to do it sometime." i heard her breathe heavily as she talked. and she said that for years she'd done nothing different. her life had been dedicated to finding me in reality, through that identifying phrase: "eyes of a blue dog." and she went along the street saying it aloud, as a way of telling the only person who could have understood her:"i'm the one who comes into your dreams every night and tells you: 'eyes of a blue dog.'" and she said that she went into restaurants and before ordering said to the waiters: "eyes of a blue dog." but the waiters bowed reverently, without remembering ever having said that in their dreams. then she would write on the napkins and scratch on the varnish of the tables with a knife: "eyes of a blue dog." and on the steamed-up windows of hotels, stations, all public buildings, she would write with her forefinger: "eyes of a blue dog." she said that once she went into a drugstore and noticed the same smell that she had smelled in her room one night after having dreamed about me. "he must be near," she thought, seeing the clean, new tiles of the drugstore. then she went over to the clerk and said to him: "i always dream about a man who says to me: 'eyes of a blue dog.'" and she said the clerk had looked at her eyes and told her: "as a matter of fact, miss, you do have eyes like that." and she said to him: "i have to find the man who told me those very words in my dreams." and the clerk started to laugh and moved to the other end of the counter. she kept on seeing the clean tile and smelling the odor. and she opened her purse and on the tiles with her crimson lipstick, she wrote in red letters: "eyes of a blue dog." the clerk came back from where he had been. he told her: madam, you have dirtied the tiles." he gave her a damp cloth, saying: "clean it up." and she said, still by the lamp, that she had spent the whole afternoon on all fours, washing the tiles and saying: "eyes of a blue dog," until people gathered at the door and said she was crazy.now, when she finished speaking, i remained in the corner, sitting, rocking in the chair. "every day i try to remember the phrase with which i am to find you," i said. "now i don't think i'll forget it tomorrow. still, i've always said the same thing and when i wake up i've always forgotten what the words i can find you with are." and she said: "you invented them yourself on the first day." and i said to her: "i invented them because i saw your eyes of ash. but i never remember the next morning." and she, with clenched fists, beside the lamp, breathed deeply: "if you could at least remember now what city i've been writing it in."her tightened teeth gleamed over the flame. "i'd like to touch you now," i said. she raised the face that had been looking at the light; she raised her look, burning, roasting, too, just like her, like her hands, and i felt that she saw me, in the corner where i was sitting, rocking in the chair. "you'd never told me that," she said. "i tell you now and it's the truth," i said. from the other side of the lamp she asked for a cigarette. the butt had disappeared between my fingers. i'd forgotten i was smoking. she said: "i don't know why i can't remember where i wrote it." and i said to her: "for the same reason that tomorrow i won't be able to remember the words." and she said sadly: "no. it's just that sometimes i think that i've dreamed that too." i stood up and walked toward the lamp. she was a little beyond, and i kept on walking with the cigarettes and matches in my hand, which would not go beyond the lamp. i held the cigarette out to her. she squeezed it between her lips and leaned over to reach the flame before i had time to light the match. "in some city in the world, on all the walls, those words have to appear in writing: 'eyes of a blue dog," i said. "if i remembered them tomorrow i could find you." she raised her head again and now the lighted coal was between her lips. "eyes of a blue dog," she sighed, remembered, with the cigarette drooping over her chin and one eye half closed. then she sucked in the smoke with the cigarette between her fingers and exclaimed: "this is something else now. i'm warming up." and she said it with her voice a little lukewarm and fleeting, as if she hadn't really said it, but as if she had written it on a piece of paper and had brought the paper close to the flame while i read: "i'm warming," and she had continued with the paper between her thumb and forefinger, turning it around as it was being consumed and i had just read ". . . up," before the paper was completely consumed and dropped all wrinkled to the floor,  diminished, converted into light ash dust. "that's better," i said. "sometimes it frightens me to see you that way. trembling beside a lamp."we had been seeing each other for several years. sometimes, when we were already together, somebody would drop a spoon outside and we would wake up. little by little we'd been coming to understand that our friendship was subordinated to things, to the simplest of happenings. our meetings always ended that way, with the fall of a spoon early in the morning.now, next to the lamp, she was looking at me. i remembered that she had also looked at me in that way in the past, from that remote dream where i made the chair spin on its back legs and remained facing a strange woman with ashen eyes. it was in that dream that i asked her for the first time: "who are you?" and she said to me: "i don't remember." i said to her: "but i think we've seen each other before." and she said, indifferently: "i think i dreamed about you once, about this same room." and i told her: "that's it. i'm beginning to remember now." and she said: "how strange. it's certain that we've met in other dreams."she took two drags on the cigarette. i was still standing, facing the lamp, when suddenly i kept looking at her. i looked her up and down and she was still copper; no longer hard and cold metal, but yellow, soft, malleable copper. "i'd like to touch you," i said again. and she said: "you'll ruin everything." i said: "it doesn't matter now. all we have to do is turn the pillow in order to meet again." and i held my hand out over the lamp. she didn't move. "you'll ruin everything," she said again before i could touch her. "maybe, if you come around behind the lamp, we'd wake up frightened in who knows what part of the world." but i insisted: "it doesn't matter." and she said: "if we turned over the pillow, we'd meet again. but when you wake up you'll have forgotten." i began to move toward the corner. she stayed behind, warming her hands over the flame. and i still wasn't beside the chair when i heard her say behind me: "when i wake up at midnight, i keep turning in bed, with the fringe of the pillow burning my knee, and repeating until dawn: 'eyes of a blue dog.'"then i remained with my face toward the wall. "it's already dawning," i said without looking at her. "when it struck two i was awake and that was a long time back." i went to the door. when i had the knob in my hand, i heard her voice again, the same, invariable. "don't open that door," she said. "the hallway is full of difficult dreams." and i asked her: "how do you know?" and she told me: "because i was there a moment ago and i had to come back when i discovered i was sleeping on my heart." i had the door half opened. i moved it a little and a cold, thin breeze brought me the fresh smell of vegetable earth, damp fields. she spoke again. i gave the turn, still moving the door, mounted on silent hinges, and i told her: "i don't think there's any hallway outside here. i'm getting the smell of country." and she, a little distant, told me: "i know that better than you. what's happening is that there's a woman outside dreaming about the country." she crossed her arms over the flame. she continued speaking: "it's that woman who always wanted to have a house in the country and was never able to leave the city." i remembered having seen the woman in some previous dream, but i knew, with the door ajar now, that within half an hour i would have to go down for breakfast. and i said: "in any case, i have to leave here in order to wake up."outside the wind fluttered for an instant, then remained quiet, and the breathing of someone sleeping who had just turned over in bed could be heard. the wind from the fields had ceased. there were no more smells. "tomorrow i'll recognize you from that," i said. "i'll recognize you when on the street i see a woman writing 'eyes of a blue dog' on the walls." and she, with a sad smile--which was already a smile of surrender to the impossible, the unreachable--said: "yet you won't remember anything during the day." and she put her hands back over the lamp, her features darkened by a bitter cloud. "you're the only man who doesn't remember anything of what he's dreamed after he wakes up."monday dawned warm and rainless. aurelio escovar, a dentist without a degree, and a very early riser, opened his office at six. he took some false teeth, still mounted in their plaster mold, out of the glass case and put on the table a fistful of instruments which he arranged in size order, as if they were on display. he wore a collarless striped shirt, closed at the neck with a golden stud, and pants held up by suspenders he was erect and skinny, with a look that rarely corresponded to the situation, the way deaf people have of looking.when he had things arranged on the table, he pulled the drill toward the dental chair and sat down to polish the false teeth. he seemed not to be thinking about what he was doing, but worked steadily, pumping the drill with his feet, even when he didn't need it.after eight he stopped for a while to look at the sky through the window, and he saw two pensive buzzards who were drying themselves in the sun on the ridgepole of the house next door. he went on working with the idea that before lunch it would rain again. the shrill voice of his elevenyear-old son interrupted his concentration."papa.""what?""the mayor wants to know if you'll pull his tooth.""tell him i'm not here."he was polishing a gold tooth. he held it at arm's length, and examined it with his eyes half closed. his son shouted again from the little waiting room."he says you are, too, because he can hear you."the dentist kept examining the tooth. only when he had put it on the table with the finished work did he say:"so much the better."he operated the drill again. he took several pieces of a bridge out of a cardboard box where he kept the things he still had to do and began to polish the gold."papa.""what?"he still hadn't changed his expression."he says if you don't take out his tooth, he'll shoot you."without hurrying, with an extremely tranquil movement, he stopped pedaling the drill, pushed it away from the chair, and pulled the lower drawer of the table all the way out. there was a revolver. "o.k.," he said. "tell him to come and shoot me."he rolled the chair over opposite the door, his hand resting on the edge of the drawer. the mayor appeared at the door. he had shaved the left side of his face, but the other side, swollen and in pain, had a five-day-old beard. the dentist saw many nights of desperation in his dull eyes. he closed the drawer with his fingertips and said softly:"sit down.""good morning," said the mayor."morning," said the dentist.while the instruments were boiling, the mayor leaned his skull on the headrest of the chair and felt better. his breath was icy. it was a poor office: an old wooden chair, the pedal drill, a glass case with ceramic bottles. opposite the chair was a window with a shoulder-high cloth curtain. when he felt the dentist approach, the mayor braced his heels and opened his mouth.aurelio escovar turned his head toward the light. after inspecting the infected tooth, he closed the mayor's jaw with a cautious pressure of his fingers."it has to be without anesthesia," he said."why?""because you have an abscess."the mayor looked him in the eye. "all right," he said, and tried to smile. the dentist did not return the smile. he brought the basin of sterilized instruments to the worktable and took them out of the water with a pair of cold tweezers, still without hurrying. then he pushed the spittoon with the tip of his shoe, and went to wash his hands in the washbasin. he did all this without looking at the mayor. but the mayor didn't take his eyes off him.it was a lower wisdom tooth. the dentist spread his feet and grasped the tooth with the hot forceps. the mayor seized the arms of the chair, braced his feet with all his strength, and felt an icy void in his kidneys, but didn't make a sound. the dentist moved only his wrist. without rancor, rather with a bitter tenderness, he said:"now you'll pay for our twenty dead men."the mayor felt the crunch of bones in his jaw, and his eyes filled with tears. but he didn't breathe until he felt the tooth come out. then he saw it through his tears. it seemed so foreign to his pain that he failed to understand his torture of the five previous nights.bent over the spittoon, sweating, panting, he unbuttoned his tunic and reached for the handkerchief in his pants pocket. the dentist gave him a clean cloth."dry your tears," he said.the mayor did. he was trembling. while the dentist washed his hands, he saw the crumbling ceiling and a dusty spider web with spider's eggs and dead insects. the dentist returned, drying his hands. "go to bed," he said, "and gargle with salt water." the mayor stood up, said goodbye with a casual military salute, and walked toward the door, stretching his legs, without buttoning up his tunic."send the bill," he said."to you or the town?"the mayor didn't look at him. he closed the door and said through the screen:"it's the same damn thing."paris had just heard of the disaster of sedan. the republic was proclaimed. all france was panting from a madness that lasted until the time of the commonwealth. everybody was playing at soldier from one end of the country to the other.capmakers became colonels, assuming the duties of generals; revolvers and daggers were displayed on large rotund bodies enveloped in red sashes; common citizens turned warriors, commanding battalions of noisy volunteers and swearing like troopers to emphasize their importance.the very fact of bearing arms and handling guns with a system excited a people who hitherto had only handled scales and measures and made them formidable to the first comer, without reason. they even executed a few innocent people to prove that they knew how to kill, and in roaming through virgin fields still belonging to the prussians they shot stray dogs, cows chewing the cud in peace or sick horses put out to pasture. each believed himself called upon to play a great role in military affairs. the cafã©s of the smallest villages, full of tradesmen in uniform, resembled barracks or field hospitals.now the town of canneville did not yet know the exciting news of the army and the capital. it had, however, been greatly agitated for a month over an encounter between the rival political parties. the mayor, viscount de varnetot, a small thin man, already old, remained true to the empire, especially since he saw rising up against him a powerful adversary in the great, sanguine form of dr. massarel, head of the republican party in the district, venerable chief of the masonic lodge, president of the society of agriculture and the fire department and organizer of the rural militia designed to save the country.in two weeks he had induced sixty-three men to volunteer in defense of their country--married men, fathers of families, prudent farmers and merchants of the town. these he drilled every morning in front of the mayor's window.whenever the mayor happened to appear commander massarel, covered with pistols, passing proudly up and down in front of his troops, would make them shout, "long live our country!" and this, they noticed, disturbed the little viscount, who no doubt heard in it menace and defiance and perhaps some odious recollection of the great revolution.on the morning of the fifth of september, in uniform, his revolver on the table, the doctor gave consultation to an old peasant couple. the husband had suffered with a varicose vein for seven years but had waited until his wife had one too, so that they might go and hunt up a physician together, guided by the postman when he should come with the newspaper.dr. massarel opened the door, grew pale, straightened himself abruptly and, raising his arms to heaven in a gesture of exaltation, cried out with all his might, in the face of the amazed rustics:"long live the republic! long live the republic! long live the republic!"then he dropped into his armchair weak with emotion.when the peasant explained that this sickness commenced with a feeling as if ants were running up and down his legs the doctor exclaimed: "hold your peace. i have spent too much time with you stupid people. the republic is proclaimed! the emperor is a prisoner! france is saved! long live the republic!" and, running to the door, he bellowed: "celeste! quick! celeste!"the frightened maid hastened in. he stuttered, so rapidly did he try to speak" "my boots, my saber--my cartridge box--and--the spanish dagger which is on my night table. hurry now!"the obstinate peasant, taking advantage of the moment's silence, began again: "this seemed like some cysts that hurt me when i walked."the exasperated physician shouted: "hold your peace! for heaven's sake! if you had washed your feet oftener, it would not have happened." then, seizing him by the neck, he hissed in his face: "can you not comprehend that we are living in a republic, stupid!"but the professional sentiment calmed him suddenly, and he let the astonished old couple out of the house, repeating all the time:"return tomorrow, return tomorrow, my friends; i have no more time today."while equipping himself from head to foot he gave another series of urgent orders to the maid:"run to lieutenant picard's and to sublieutenant pommel's and say to them that i want them here immediately. send torcheboeuf to me too, with his drum. quick now! quick!" and when celeste was gone he collected his thoughts and prepared to surmount the difficulties of the situation.the three men arrived together. they were in their working clothes. the commander, who had expected to see them in uniform, had a fit of surprise."you know nothing, then? the emperor has been taken prisoner. a republic is proclaimed. my position is delicate, not to say perilous."he reflected for some minutes before the astonished faces of his subordinates and then continued:"it is necessary to act, not to hesitate. minutes now are worth hours at other times. everything depends upon promptness of decision. you, picard, go and find the curate and get him to ring the bell to bring the people together, while i get ahead of them. you, torcheboeuf, beat the call to assemble the militia in arms, in the square, from even as far as the hamlets of gerisaie and salmare. you, pommel, put on your uniform at once, that is, the jacket and cap. we, together, are going to take possession of the mairie and summon monsieur de varnetot to transfer his authority to me. do you understand?""yes.""act, then, and promptly. i will accompany you to your house, pommel, since we are to work together."five minutes later the commander and his subaltern, armed to the teeth, appeared in the square just at the moment when the little viscount de varnetot, with hunting gaiters on and his rifle on his shoulder, appeared by another street, walking rapidly and followed by three guards in green jackets, each carrying a knife at his side and a gun over his shoulder.while the doctor slapped, half stupefied, the four men entered the mayor's house and the door closed behind them."we are forestalled," murmured the doctor; "it will be necessary now to wait for reinforcements; nothing can be done for a quarter of an hour."here lieutenant picard appeared. "the curate refuses to obey," said he; "he has even shut himself up in the church with the beadle and  the porter."on the other side of the square, opposite the white closed front of the mairie, the church, mute and black, showed its great oak door with the wrought-iron trimmings.then, as the puzzled inhabitants put their noses out of the windows or came out upon the steps of their houses, the rolling of a drum was heard, and torcheboeuf suddenly appeared, beating with fury the three quick strokes of the call to arms. he crossed the square with disciplined step and then disappeared on a road leading to the country.the commander drew his sword, advanced alone to the middle distance between the two buildings where the enemy was barricaded and, waving his weapon above his head, roared at the top of his lungs: "long live the republic! death to traitors!" then he fell back where his officers were. the butcher, the baker and the apothecary, feeling a little uncertain, put up their shutters and closed their shops. the grocery alone remained open.meanwhile the men of the militia were arriving little by little, variously clothed but all wearing caps, the cap constituting the whole uniform of the corps. they were armed with their old rusty guns, guns that had hung on chimney pieces in kitchens for thirty years, and looked quite like a detachment of country soldiers.when there were about thirty around him the commander explained in a few words the state of affairs. then, turning toward his major, he said: "now we must act."while the inhabitants collected, talked over and discussed the matter the doctor quickly formed his plan of campaign."lieutenant picard, you advance to the windows of the mayor's house and order monsieur de varnetot to turn over the town hall to me in the name of the republic."but the lieutenant was a master mason and refused."you are a scamp, you are. trying to make a target of me! those fellows in there are good shots, you know that. no, thanks! execute your commissions yourself!"the commander turned red. "i order you to go in the name of discipline," said he."i am not spoiling my features without knowing why," the lieutenant returned.men of influence, in a group near by, were heard laughing. one of them called out: "you are right, picard, it is not the proper time." the doctor, under his breath, muttered: "cowards! " and placing his sword and his revolver in the hands of a soldier, he advanced with measured step, his eye fixed on the windows as if he expected to see a gun or a cannon pointed at him.when he was within a few steps of the building the doors at the two extremities, affording an entrance to two schools, opened, and a flood of little creatures, boys on one side, girls on the other, poured out and began playing in the open space, chattering around the doctor like a flock of birds. he scarcely knew what to make of it.as soon as the last were out the doors closed. the greater part of the little monkeys finally scattered, and then the commander called out in a loud voice:"monsieur de varnetot?" a window in the first story opened and m. de varnetot appeared.the commander began: "monsieur, you are aware of the great events which have changed the system of government. the party you represent no longer exists. the side i represent now comes into power. under these sad but decisive circumstances i come to demand you, in the name of the republic, to put in my hand the authority vested in you by the outgoing power."m. de varnetot replied: "doctor massarel, i am mayor of canneville, so placed by the proper authorities, and mayor of canneville i shall remain until the title is revoked and replaced by an order from my superiors. as mayor, i am at home in the mairie, and there i shall stay. furthermore, just try to put me out." and he closed the window.the commander returned to his troops. but before explaining anything, measuring lieutenant picard from head to foot, he said:"you are a numskull, you are--a goose, the disgrace of the army. i shall degrade you."the lieutenant replied: "i'll attend to that myself." and he went over to a group of muttering civilians.then the doctor hesitated. what should he do? make an assault? would his men obey him? and then was he surely in the right? an idea burst upon him. he ran to the telegraph office on the other side of the square and hurriedly sent three dispatches: "to the members of the republican government at paris"; "to the new republican prefect of the lower seine at rouen"; "to the new republican subprefect of dieppe."he exposed the situation fully; told of the danger run by the commonwealth from remaining in the hands of the monarchistic mayor, offered his devout services, asked for orders and signed his name, following it up with all his titles. then he returned to his army corps and, drawing ten francs out of his pocket, said:"now, my friends, go and eat and drink a little something. only leave here a detachment of ten men, so that no one leaves the mayor's house."ex-lieutenant picard, chatting with the watchmaker, overheard this. with a sneer he remarked: "pardon me, but if they go out, there will be an opportunity for you to go in. otherwise i can't see how you are to get in there!"the doctor made no reply but went away to luncheon. in the afternoon he disposed of offices all about town, having the air of knowing of an impending surprise. many times he passed before the doors of the mairie and of the church without noticing anything suspicious; one could have believed the two buildings empty.the butcher, the baker and the apothecary reopened their shops and stood gossiping on the steps. if the emperor had been taken prisoner, there must be a traitor somewhere. they did not feel sure of the revenue of a new republic.night came on. toward nine o'clock the doctor returned quietly and alone to the mayor's residence, persuaded that his adversary had retired. and as he was trying to force an entrance with a few blows of a pickax the loud voice of a guard demanded suddenly: "who goes there?" m. massarel beat a retreat at the top of his speed.another day dawned without any change in the situation. the militia in arms occupied the square. the inhabitants stood around awaiting the solution. people from neighboring villages came to look on. finally the doctor, realizing that his reputation was at stake, resolved to settle the thing in one way or another. he had just decided that it must be something energetic when the door of the telegraph office opened and the little servant of the directress appeared, holding in her hand two papers.she went directly to the commander and gave him one of the dispatches; then, crossing the square, intimidated by so many eyes fixed upon her, with lowered head and mincing steps, she rapped gently at the door of the barricaded house as if ignorant that a part of the army was concealed there.the door opened slightly; the hand of a man received the message, and the girl returned, blushing and ready to weep from being stared at.the doctor demanded with stirring voice: "a little silence, if you please." and after the populace became quiet he continued proudly:here is a communication which i have received from the government." and, raising the dispatch, he read:"old mayor deposed. advise us what is most necessary. instructions later."for the subprefect,"sapin, counselor."he had triumphed. his heart was beating with joy. his hand trembled, when picard, his old subaltern, cried out to him from the neighboring group:"that's all right; but if the others in there won't go out, your paper hasn't a leg to stand on." the doctor grew a little pale. if they would not go out--in fact, he must go ahead now. it was not only his right but his duty. and he looked anxiously at the house of the mayoralty, hoping that he might see the door open and his adversary show himself. but the door remained closed. what was to be done? the crowd was increasing, surrounding the militia. some laughed.one thought, especially, tortured the doctor. if he should make an assault, he must march at the head of his men; and as with him dead all contest would cease, it would be at him and at him alone that m. de varnetot and the three guards would aim. and their aim was good, very good! picard had reminded him of that.but an idea shone in upon him, and turning to pommel, he said: "go, quickly, and ask the apothecary to send me a napkin and a pole."the lieutenant hurried off. the doctor was going to make a political banner, a white one, that would, perhaps, rejoice the heart of that old legitimist, the mayor.pommel returned with the required linen and a broom handle. with some pieces of string they improvised a standard, which massarel seized in both hands. again he advanced toward the house of mayoralty, bearing the standard before him. when in front of the door, he called out: "monsieur de varnetot!"the door opened suddenly, and m. de varnetot and the three guards appeared on the threshold. the doctor recoiled instinctively. then he saluted his enemy courteously and announced, almost strangled by emotion: "i have come, sir, to communicate to you the instructions i have just received."that gentleman, without any salutation whatever, replied: "i am going to withdraw, sir, but you must understand that it is not because of fear or in obedience to an odious government that has  usurped the power." and, biting off each word, he declared: "i do not wish to have the appearance of serving the republic for a single day. that is all."massarel, amazed, made no reply; and m. de varnetot, walking off at a rapid pace, disappeared around the corner, followed closely by his escort. then the doctor, slightly dismayed, returned to the crowd. when he was near enough to be heard he cried: "hurrah! hurrah! the republic triumphs all along the line!"but no emotion was manifested. the doctor tried again. "the people are free! you are free and independent! do you understand? be proud of it!"the listless villagers looked at him with eyes unlit by glory. in his turn he looked at them, indignant at their indifference, seeking for some wore that could make a grand impression, electrify this placid country and make good his mission. the inspiration came, and turning to pommel, he said "lieutenant, go and get the bust of the ex-emperor, which is in the council hall, and bring it to me with a chair."and soon the man reappears, carrying on his right shoulder napoleon ii in plaster and holding in his left hand a straw-bottomed chair.massarel met him, took the chair, placed it on the ground, put the white image upon it, fell back a few steps and called out in sonorous voice:"tyrant! tyrant! here do you fall! fall in the dust and in the mire. an expiring country groans under your feet. destiny has called you the avenger. defeat and shame cling to you. you fall conquered, a prisoner to the prussians, and upon the ruins of the crumbling empire the young and radiant republic arises, picking up your broken sword."he awaited applause. but there was no voice, no sound. the bewildered peasants remained silent. and the bust, with its pointed mustaches extending beyond the cheeks on each side, the bust, so motionless and well groomed as to be fit for a hairdresser's sign, seemed to be looking at m. massarel with a plaster smile, a smile ineffaceable and mocking.they remained thus face to face, napoleon on the chair, the doctor i front of him about three steps away. suddenly the commander grew angry.what was to be done? what was there that would move this people and bring about a definite victory in opinion? his hand happened to rest on his hip and to come in contact there with the butt end of his revolver under his red sash. no inspiration, no further word would come. but he drew his pistol, advanced two steps and, taking aim, fired at the late monarch. the ball entered the forehead, leaving a little black hole like a spot, nothing more. there was no effect. then he fired a second shot, which made a second hole, then a third; and then, without stopping, he emptied his revolver. the brow of napoleon disappeared in white powder, but the eyes, the nose and the fine points of the mustaches remained intact. then, exasperated, the doctor overturned the chair with a blow of his fist and, resting a foot on the remainder of the bust in a position of triumph, he shouted: "so let all tyrants perish!"still no enthusiasm was manifest, and as the spectators seemed to be in a kind of stupor from astonishment the commander called to the militiamen:you may now go to your homes." and he went toward his own house with great strides, as if he were pursued.his maid, when he appeared, told him that some patients had been waiting in his office for three hours. he hastened in. there were the two varicose-vein patients, who had returned at daybreak, obstinate but patient.the old man immediately began his explanation: "this began by a feeling like ants running up and down the legs."how strange are those old recollections which haunt us without our being able to get rid of them! this one is so very old that i cannot understand how it has clung so vividly and tenaciously to my memory. since then i have seen so many sinister things, either affecting or terrible, that i am astonished at not being able to pass a single day without the face of mother bellflower recurring to my mind's eye, just as i knew her formerly long, long ago, when i was ten or twelve years old.she was an old seamstress who came to my parents' house once a week, every thursday, to mend the linen. my parents lived in one of those country houses called chateaux, which are merely old houses with pointed roofs, to which are attached three or four adjacent farms.the village, a large village, almost a small market town, was a few hundred yards off and nestled round the church, a red brick church, which had become black with age.well, every thursday mother bellflower came between half-past six and seven in the morning and went immediately into the linen room and began to work. she was a tall, thin, bearded or rather hairy woman, for she had a beard all over her face, a surprising, an unexpected beard, growing in improbable tufts, in curly bunches which looked as if they had been sown by a madman over that great face, the face of a gendarme in petticoats. she had them on her nose, under her nose, round her nose, on her chin, on her cheeks, and her eyebrows, which were extraordinarily thick and long and quite gray, bushy and bristling, looked exactly like a pair of mustaches stuck on there by mistake.she limped, not like lame people generally do, but like a ship pitching. when she planted her great bony, vibrant body on her sound leg, she seemed to be preparing to mount some enormous wave, and then suddenly she dipped as if to disappear in an abyss and buried herself in the ground. her walk reminded one of a ship in a storm, and her head, which was always covered with an enormous white cap, whose ribbons fluttered down her back, seemed to traverse the horizon from north to south and from south to north at each limp.i adored mother bellflower. as soon as i was up i used to go into the linen room, where i found her installed at work with a foot warmer under her feet. as soon as i arrived she made me take the foot warmer and sit upon it, so that i might not catch cold in that large chilly room under the roof."that draws the blood from your head," she would say to me.she told me stories while mending the linen with her long, crooked, nimble fingers; behind her magnifying spectacles, for age had impaired her sight, her eyes appeared enormous to me,  strangely profound, double.as far as i can remember from the things which she told me and by which my childish heart was moved, she had the large heart of a poor woman. she told me what had happened in the village, how a cow had escaped from the cow house and had been found the next morning in front of prosper malet's mill looking at the sails turning, or about a hen's egg which had been found in the church belfry without anyone being able to understand what creature had been there to lay it, or the queer story of jean pila's dog who had gone ten leagues to bring back his master's breeches which a tramp had stolen while they were hanging up to dry out of doors after he had been caught in the rain. she told me these simple adventures in such a manner that in my mind they assumed the proportions of never-to-be-forgotten dramas, of grand and mysterious poems; and the ingenious stories invented by the poets, which my mother told me in the evening, had none of the flavor, none of the fullness or of the vigor of the peasant woman's narratives.well, one thursday when i had spent all the morning in listening to mother clochette, i wanted to go upstairs to her again during the day after picking hazelnuts with the manservant in the wood behind the farm. i remember it all as clearly as what happened only yesterday.on opening the door of the linen room i saw the old seamstress lying on the floor by the side of her chair, her face turned down and her arms stretched out, but still holding her needle in one hand and one of my shirts in the other. one of her legs in a blue stocking, the longer one no doubt, was extended under her chair, and her spectacles glistened by the wall, where they had rolled away from her.i ran away uttering shrill cries. they all came running, and in a few minutes i was told that mother clochette was dead.i cannot describe the profound, poignant, terrible emotion which stirred my childish heart. i went slowly down into the drawing room and hid myself in a dark corner in the depths of a great old armchair, where i knelt and wept. i remained there for a long time, no doubt, for night came on. suddenly someone came in with a lamp--without seeing me, however--and heard my father and mother talking with the medical man, whose voice recognized.he had been sent for immediately, and he was explaining the cause of the accident, of which i understood nothing, however. then he sat down and had a glass of liqueur and a biscuit.he went on talking, and what he then said will remain engraved on my mind until i die. i think that i can give the exact words which he used."ah!" he said. "the poor woman! she broke her leg the day of my arrival here. i had not even had time to wash my hands after getting off the diligence before i was sent for in all haste, for it was a bad case, very bad."she was seventeen and a pretty girl, very pretty! would anyone believe it? i have never told her story before; in fact, no one but myself and one other person, who is no longer living in this part of the country, ever knew it. now that she is dead i may be less discreet."a young assistant teacher had just come to live in the village; he was good looking and had the bearing of a soldier. all the girls ran after him, but he was disdainful. besides that, he was very much afraid of his superior, the schoolmaster, old grabu, who occasionally got out of bed the wrong foot first."old grabu already employed pretty hortense, who has just died here and who was afterward nicknamed clochette. the assistant master singled out the pretty young girl who was no doubt flattered at being chosen by this disdainful conqueror; at any rate, she fell in love with him, and he succeeded in persuading her to give him a first meeting in the hayloft behind the school at night after she had done her day's sewing."she pretended to go home, but instead of going downstairs when she left the grabus', she went upstairs and hid among the hay to wait for her lover. he soon joined her, and he was beginning to say pretty things to her, when the door of the hayloft opened and the schoolmaster appeared and asked: 'what are you doing up there, sigisbert?' feeling sure that he would be caught, the young schoolmaster lost his presence of mind and replied stupidly: 'i came up here to rest a little among the bundles of hay, monsieur grabu.'"the loft was very large and absolutely dark. sigisbert pushed the frightened girl to the farther end and said: 'go, there and hide yourself. i shall lose my situation, so get away and hide yourself.'"when the schoolmaster heard the whispering he continued: 'why, you are not by yourself.'"'yes, i am, monsieur grabu!'"'but you are not, for you are talking.'"'i swear i am, monsieur grabu.'"'i will soon find out,' the old man replied and, double-locking the door, he went down to get a light."then the young man, who was a coward such as one sometimes meets, lost his head, and he repeated, having grown furious all of a sudden: 'hide yourself, so that he may not find you. you will deprive me of my bread for my whole life; you will ruin my whole career! do hide yourself!'"they could hear the key turning in the lock again, and hortense ran to the window which looked out onto the street, opened it quickly and then in a low and determined voice said: 'you will come and pick me up when he is gone,' and she jumped out."old grabu found nobody and went down again in great surprise! a quarter of an hour later monsieur sigisbert came to me and related his adventure. the girl had remained at the foot of the wall, unable to get up, as she had fallen from the second story, and i went with him to fetch her. it was raining in torrents, and i brought the unfortunate girl home with me, for the right leg was broken in three places, and the bones had come out through the flesh. she did not complain and merely said with admirable resignation: 'i am punished, well punished!'"i sent for assistance and for the workgirl's friends and told them a made-up story of a runaway carriage which had knocked her down and lamed her outside my door. they believed me, and the gendarmes for a whole month tried in vain to find the author of this accident."that is all! now i say that this woman was a heroine and had the fiber of those who accomplish the grandest deeds in history."that was her only love affair, and she died a virgin. she was a martyr, a noble soul, a sublimely devoted woman! and if i did not absolutely admire her i should not have told you this story, which i would never tell anyone during her life; you understand why."the doctor ceased; mamma cried, and papa said some words which i did not catch; then they left the room, and i remained on my knees in the armchair and sobbed, while i heard a strange noise of heavy footsteps and something knocking against the side of the staircase.they were carrying away clochette's body."well doctor, a little brandy?""with pleasure."the old ship's surgeon, holding out his glass, watched it as it slowly filled with the golden liquid. then, holding it in front of his eyes, he let the light from the lamp stream through it, smelled it, tasted a few drops and smacked his lips with relish. then he said:"ah! the charming poison! or rather the seductive murderer, the delightful destroyer of peoples!"you people do not know it the way i do. you may have read that admirable book entitled l'assommoir, but you have not, as i have, seen alcohol exterminate a whole tribe of savages, a little kingdom of negroes--alcohol calmly unloaded by the barrel by red-bearded english seamen."right near here, in a little village in brittany near pont-l'abbe, i once witnessed a strange and terrible tragedy caused by alcohol. i was spending my vacation in a little country house left me by my father. you know this flat coast where the wind whistles day and night, where one sees, standing or prone, these giant rocks which in the olden times were regarded as guardians, and which still retain something majestic and imposing about them. i always expect to see them come to life and start to walk across the country with the slow and ponderous tread of giants, or to unfold enormous granite wings and fly toward the paradise of the druids."everywhere is the sea, always ready on the slightest provocation to rise in its anger and shake its foamy mane at those bold enough to brave its wrath."and the men who travel on this terrible sea, which, with one motion of its green back, can overturn and swallow up their frail barks--they go out in the little boats, day and night, hardy, weary and drunk. they are often drunk. they have a saying which says: 'when the bottle is full you see the reef, but when it is empty you see it no more.'"go into one of their huts; you will never find the father there. if you ask the woman what has become of her husband, she will stretch her arms out over the dark ocean which rumbles and roars along the coast. he remained, there one night, when he had had too much to drink; so did her oldest son. she has four more big, strong, fair-haired boys. soon it will be their time."as i said, i was living in a little house near pont-l'abbe. i was there alone with my servant, an old sailor, and with a native family which took care of the grounds in my absence. it consisted of three persons, two sisters and a man, who had married one of them, and who attended to the garden."a short time before christmas my gardener's wife presented him with a boy. the husband asked me to stand as god-father. i could hardly deny the request, and so he borrowed ten francs from me for the cost of the christening, as he said."the second day of january was chosen as the date of the ceremony. for a week the earth had been covered by an enormous white carpet of snow, which made this flat, low country seem vast and limitless. the ocean appeared to be black in contrast with this white plain; one could see it rolling, raging and tossing its waves as though wishing to annihilate its pale neighbor, which appeared to be dead, it was so calm, quiet and cold."at nine o'clock the father, kerandec, came to my door with his sister-in-law, the big kermagan, and the nurse, who carried the infant wrapped up in a blanket. we started for the church. the weather was so cold that it seemed to dry up the skin and crack it open. i was thinking of the poor little creature who was being carried on ahead of us, and i said to myself that this breton race must surely be of iron, if their children were able, as soon as they were born, to stand such an outing."we came to the church, but the door was closed; the priest was late."then the nurse sat down on one of the steps and began to undress the child. at first i thought there must have been some slight accident, but i saw that they were leaving the poor little fellow naked completely naked, in the icy air. furious at such imprudence, i protested:"'why, you are crazy! you will kill the child!'"the woman answered quietly: 'oh, no, sir; he must wait naked before the lord.'"the father and the aunt looked on undisturbed. it was the custom. if it were not adhered to misfortune was sure to attend the little one."i scolded, threatened and pleaded. i used force to try to cover the frail creature. all was in vain. the nurse ran away from me through the snow, and the body of the little one turned purple. i was about to leave these brutes when i saw the priest coming across the country, followed by the sexton and a young boy. i ran towards him and gave vent to my indignation. he showed no surprise nor did he quicken his pace in the least. he answered:"'what can you expect, sir? it's the custom. they all do it, and it's of no use trying to stop them.'"'but at least hurry up!' i cried."he answered: 'but i can't go any faster.'"he entered the vestry, while we remained outside on the church steps. i was suffering. but what about the poor little creature who was howling from the effects of the biting cold."at last the door opened. he went into the church. but the poor child had to remain naked throughout the ceremony. it was interminable. the priest stammered over the latin words and mispronounced them horribly. he walked slowly and with a ponderous tread. his white surplice chilled my heart. it seemed as though, in the name of a pitiless and barbarous god, he had wrapped himself in another kind of snow in order to torture this little piece of humanity that suffered so from the cold."finally the christening was finished according to the rites and i saw the nurse once more take the frozen, moaning child and wrap it up in the blanket."the priest said to me: 'do you wish to sign the register?'"turning to my gardener, i said: "hurry up and get home quickly so that you can warm that child.' i gave him some advice so as to ward off, if not too late, a bad attack of pneumonia. he promised to follow my instructions and left with his sister-in-law and the nurse. i followed the priest into the vestry, and when i had signed he demanded five francs for expenses."as i had already given the father ten francs, i refused to pay twice. the priest threatened to destroy the paper and to annul the ceremony. i, in turn, threatened him with the district attorney. the dispute was long, and i finally paid five francs."as soon as i reached home i went down to kerandec's to find out whether everything was all right. neither father, nor sister-in-law, nor nurse had yet returned. the mother, who had remained alone, was in bed, shivering with cold and starving, for she had had nothing to eat since the day before."'where the deuce can they have gone?' i asked. she answered without surprise or anger, 'they're going to drink something to celebrate: it was the custom. then i thought, of my ten francs which were to pay the church and would doubtless pay for the alcohol."i sent some broth to the mother and ordered a good fire to be built in the room. i was uneasy and furious and promised myself to drive out these brutes, wondering with terror what was going to happen to the poor infant."it was already six, and they had not yet returned. i told my servant to wait for them and i went to bed. i soon fell asleep and slept like a top. at daybreak i was awakened by my servant, who was bringing me my hot water."as soon as my eyes were open i asked: 'how about kerandec?'"the man hesitated and then stammered: 'oh! he came back, all right, after midnight, and so drunk that he couldn't walk, and so were kermagan and the nurse. i guess they must have slept in a ditch, for the little one died and they never even noticed it.'"i jumped up out of bed, crying:"'what! the child is dead?'"'yes, sir. they brought it back to mother kerandec. when she saw it she began to cry, and now they are making her drink to console her.'"'what's that? they are making her drink!'"'yes, sir. i only found it out this morning. as kerandec had no more brandy or money, he took some wood alcohol, which monsieur gave him for the lamp, and all four of them are now drinking that. the mother is feeling pretty sick now.'"i had hastily put on some clothes, and seizing a stick, with the intention of applying it to the backs of these human beasts, i hastened towards the gardener's house."the mother was raving drunk beside the blue body of her dead baby. kerandec, the nurse, and the kermagan woman were snoring on the floor. i had to take care of the mother, who died towards noon."the old doctor was silent. he took up the brandy-bottle and poured out another glass. he held it up to the lamp, and the light streaming through it imparted to the liquid the amber color of molten topaz. with one gulp he swallowed the treacherous drink.throughout the whole countryside the lucas farm, was known as "the manor." no one knew why. the peasants doubtless attached to this word, "manor," a meaning of wealth and of splendor, for this farm was undoubtedly the largest, richest and the best managed in the whole neighborhood.the immense court, surrounded by five rows of magnificent trees, which sheltered the delicate apple trees from the harsh wind of the plain, inclosed in its confines long brick buildings used for storing fodder and grain, beautiful stables built of hard stone and made to accommodate thirty horses, and a red brick residence which looked like a little chateau.thanks for the good care taken, the manure heaps were as little offensive as such things can be; the watch-dogs lived in kennels, and countless poultry paraded through the tall grass.every day, at noon, fifteen persons, masters, farmhands and the women folks, seated themselves around the long kitchen table where the soup was brought in steaming in a large, blue-flowered bowl.the beasts-horses, cows, pigs and sheep-were fat, well fed and clean. maitre lucas, a tall man who was getting stout, would go round three times a day, overseeing everything and thinking of everything.a very old white horse, which the mistress wished to keep until its natural death, because she had brought it up and had always used it, and also because it recalled many happy memories, was housed, through sheer kindness of heart, at the end of the stable.a young scamp about fifteen years old, isidore duval by name, and called, for convenience, zidore, took care of this pensioner, gave him his measure of oats and fodder in winter, and in summer was supposed to change his pasturing place four times a day, so that he might have plenty of fresh grass.the animal, almost crippled, lifted with difficulty his legs, large at the knees and swollen above the hoofs. his coat, which was no longer curried, looked like white hair, and his long eyelashes gave to his eyes a sad expression.when zidore took the animal to pasture, he had to pull on the rope with all his might, because it walked so slowly; and the youth, bent over and out of breath, would swear at it, exasperated at having to care for this old nag.the farmhands, noticing the young rascal's anger against coco, were amused and would continually talk of the horse to zidore, in order to exasperate him. his comrades would make sport with him. in the village he was called coco-zidore.the boy would fume, feeling an unholy desire to revenge himself on the horse. he was a thin, long-legged, dirty child, with thick, coarse, bristly red hair. he seemed only half-witted, and stuttered as though ideas were unable to form in his thick, brute-like mind.for a long time he had been unable to understand why coco should be kept, indignant at seeing things wasted on this useless beast. since the horse could no longer work, it seemed to him unjust that he should be fed; he revolted at the idea of wasting oats, oats which were so expensive, on this paralyzed old plug. and often, in spite of the orders of maitre lucas, he would economize on the nag's food, only giving him half measure. hatred grew in his confused, childlike mind, the hatred of a stingy, mean, fierce, brutal and cowardly peasant.when summer came he had to move the animal about in the pasture. it was some distance away. the rascal, angrier every morning, would start, with his dragging step, across the wheat fields. the men working in the fields would shout to him, jokingly:"hey, zidore, remember me to coco."he would not answer; but on the way he would break off a switch, and, as soon as he had moved the old horse, he would let it begin grazing; then, treacherously sneaking up behind it, he would slash its legs. the animal would try to escape, to kick, to get away from the blows, and run around in a circle about its rope, as though it had been inclosed in a circus ring. and the boy would slash away furiously, running along behind, his teeth clenched in anger.then he would go away slowly, without turning round, while the horse watched him disappear, his ribs sticking out, panting as a result of his unusual exertions. not until the blue blouse of the young peasant was out of sight would he lower his thin white head to the grass.as the nights were now warm, coco was allowed to sleep out of doors, in the field behind the little wood. zidore alone went to see him. the boy threw stones at him to amuse himself. he would sit down on an embankment about ten feet away and would stay there about half an hour, from time to time throwing a sharp stone at the old horse, which remained standing tied before his enemy, watching him continually and not daring to eat before he was gone.this one thought persisted in the mind of the young scamp: "why feed this horse, which is no longer good for anything?" it seemed to him that this old nag was stealing the food of the others, the goods of man and god, that he was even robbing him, zidore, who was working.then, little by little, each day, the boy began to shorten the length of rope which allowed the horse to graze.the hungry animal was growing thinner, and starving. too feeble to break his bonds, he would stretch his head out toward the tall, green, tempting grass, so near that he could smell, and yet so far that he could not touch it.but one morning zidore had an idea: it was, not to move coco any more. he was tired of walking so far for that old skeleton. he came, however, in order to enjoy his vengeance. the beast watched him anxiously. he did not beat him that day. he walked around him with his hands in his pockets. he even pretended to change his place, but he sank the stake in exactly the same hole, and went away overjoyed with his invention.the horse, seeing him leave, neighed to call him back; but the rascal began to run, leaving him alone, entirely alone in his field, well tied down and without a blade of grass within reach.starving, he tried to reach the grass which he could touch with the end of his nose. he got on his knees, stretching out his neck and his long, drooling lips. all in vain. the old animal spent the whole day in useless, terrible efforts. the sight of all that green food, which stretched out on all sides of him, served to increase the gnawing pangs of hunger.the scamp did not return that day. he wandered through the woods in search of nests.the next day he appeared upon the scene again. coco, exhausted, had lain down. when he saw the boy, he got up, expecting at last to have his place changed.but the little peasant did not even touch the mallet, which was lying on the ground. he came nearer, looked at the animal, threw at his head a clump of earth which flattened out against the white hair, and he started off again, whistling.the horse remained standing as long as he could see him; then, knowing that his attempts to reach the near-by grass would be hopeless, he once more lay down on his side and closed his eyes.the following day zidore did not come.when he did come at last, he found coco still stretched out; he saw that he was dead.then he remained standing, looking at him, pleased with what he had done, surprised that it should already be all over. he touched him with his foot, lifted one of his legs and then let it drop, sat on him and remained there, his eyes fixed on the grass, thinking of nothing. he returned to the farm, but did not mention the accident, because he wished to wander about at the hours when he used to change the horse's pasture. he went to see him the next day. at his approach some crows flew away. countless flies were walking over the body and were buzzing around it. when he returned home, he announced the event. the animal was so old that nobody was surprised. the master said to two of the men:"take your shovels and dig a hole right where he is."the men buried the horse at the place where he had died of hunger. and the grass grew thick, green and vigorous, fed by the poor body.the noon sun poured fiercely down upon the fields. they stretched in undulating folds between the clumps of trees that marked each farmhouse; the different crops, ripe rye and yellowing wheat, pale-green oats, dark-green clover, spread a vast striped cloak, soft and rippling, over the naked body of the earth.in the distance, on the crest of a slope, was an endless line of cows, ranked like soldiers, some lying down, others standing, their large eyes blinking in the burning light, chewing the cud and grazing on a field of clover as broad as a lake.two women, mother and daughter, were walking with a swinging step, one behind the other, towards this regiment of cattle. each carried two zinc pails, slung outwards from the body on a hoop from a cask; at each step the metal sent out a dazzling white flash under the sun that struck full upon it.the women did not speak. they were on their way to milk the cows. when they arrive, they set down one of their pails and approach the first two cows, making them stand up with a kick in the ribs from wooden-shod feet. the beast rises slowly, first on its forelegs, then with more difficulty raises its large hind quarters, which seem to be weighted down by the enormous udder of livid pendulous flesh.the two malivoires, mother and daughter, kneeling beneath the animal's belly, tug with a swift movement of their hands at the swollen teat, which at each squeeze sends a slender jet of milk into the pail. the yellowish froth mounts to the brim, and the women go from cow to cow until they reach the end of the long line.as soon as they finish milking a beast, they change its position, giving it a fresh patch of grass on which to graze.then they start on their way home, more slowly now, weighed down by the load of milk, the mother in front, the daughter behind.abruptly the latter halts, sets down her burden, sits down, and begins to cry.madame malivoire, missing the sound of steps behind her, turns round and is quite amazed."what's the matter with you?" she said.her daughter celeste, a tall girl with flaming red hair and flaming cheeks, flecked with freckles as though sparks of fire had fallen upon her face one day as she worked in the sun, murmurs, moaning softly, like a beaten child:"i can't carry the milk any further."her mother looked at her suspiciously."what's the matter with you?" she repeated."it drags too heavy, i can't," replied celeste, who had collapsed and was lying on the ground between the two pails, hiding her eyes in her apron."what's the matter with you, then?" said her mother for the third time. the girl moaned:"i think there's a baby on the way." and she broke into sobs.the old woman now in her turn set down her load, so amazed that she could find nothing to say. at last she stammered:"you . . . you . . . you're going to have a baby, you clod! how can that be?"the malivoires were prosperous farmers, wealthy and of a certain position, widely respected, good business folk, of some importance in the district."i think i am, all the same," faltered celeste.the frightened mother looked at the weeping girl grovelling at her feet. after a few seconds she cried:"you're going to have a baby! a baby! where did you get it, you slut?"celeste, shaken with emotion, murmured:"i think it was in polyte's coach."the old woman tried to understand, tried to imagine, to realise who could have brought this misfortune upon her daughter. if the lad was well off and of decent position, an arrangement might be come to. the damage could still be repaired. celeste was not the first to be in the same way, but it was annoying all the same, seeing their position and the way people talked."and who was it, you slut?" she repeated.celeste, resolved to make a clean breast of it, stammered:"i think it was polyte."at that madame malivoire, mad with rage, rushed upon her daughter and began to beat her with such fury that her hat fell off in the effort.with great blows of the fist she struck her on the head, on the back, all over her body; celeste, prostrate between the two pails, which afforded her some slight protection, shielded just her face with her hands.all the cows, disturbed, had stopped grazing and turned round, staring with their great eyes. the last one mooed, stretching out its muzzle towards the women.after beating her daughter till she was out of breath, madame malivoire stopped, exhausted; her spirits reviving a little, she tried to get a thorough understanding of the situation."--- polyte! lord save us, it's not possible! how could you, with a carrier? you must have lost your wits. he must have played you a trick, the good-for-nothing!"celeste, still prostrate, murmured in the dust:"i didn't pay my fare!"and the old norman woman understood.every week, on wednesday and on saturday, celeste went to town with the farm produce, poultry, cream, and eggs.she started at seven with her two huge baskets on her arm, the dairy produce in one, the chickens in the other, and went to the main road to wait for the coach to yvetot.she set down her wares and sat in the ditch, while the chickens with their short pointed beaks and the ducks with their broad flat bills thrust their heads between the wicker bars and looked about them with their round, stupid, surprised eyes.soon the bus, a sort of yellow box with a black leather cap on the top, came up, jerking and quivering with the trotting of the old white horse.polyte the coachman, a big, jolly fellow, stout though still young, and so burnt up by sun and wind, soaked by rain, and coloured with brandy that his face and neck were brick-red, cracked his whip and shouted from the distance:"morning, mam'selle celeste. in good health, i hope?"she gave him her baskets, one after the other, which he stowed in the boot; then she got in, lifting her leg high up to reach the step, and exposing a sturdy leg clad in a blue stocking.every time polyte repeated the same joke: "well, it's not got any thinner."she laughed, thinking this funny.then he uttered a "gee up, old girl!" which started off the thin horse. then celeste, reaching for her purse in the depths of her pocket, slowly took out fivepence, threepence for herself and twopence for the baskets, and handed them to polyte over his shoulder.he took them, saying:"aren't we going to have our little bit of sport to-day?"and he laughed heartily, turning round towards her so as to stare at her at his ease.she found it a big expense, the half-franc for a journey of two miles. and when she had no coppers she felt it still more keenly; it was hard to make up her mind to part with a silver coin.one day, as she was paying, she asked:"from a good customer like me you oughtn't to take more than threepence."he burst out laughing."threepence, my beauty; why, you're worth more than that."she insisted on the point."but you make a good two francs a month out of me."he whipped up his horse and exclaimed:"look here, i'm an obliging fellow! we'll call it quits for a bit of sport.""what do you mean?" she asked with an air of innocence.he was so amused that he laughed till he coughed."a bit of sport is a bit of sport, damn it; a game for a lad and a lass, a dance for two without music."she understood, blushed, and declared:"i don't care for that sort of game, monsieur polyte."but he was in no way abashed, and repeated, with growing merriment:"you'll come to it some day, my beauty, a bit of sport for a lad and a lass!"and since that day he had taken to asking her, each time that she paid her fare:"aren't we going to have our bit of sport to-day?"she, too, joked about it by this time, and replied:"not to-day, monsieur polyte, but saturday, for certain!"and amid peals of laughter he answered:"saturday, then, my beauty."but inwardly she calculated that, during the two years the affair had been going on, she had paid polyte forty-eight whole francs, and in the country forty-eight francs is not a sum which can be picked up on the roadside; she also calculated that in two more years she would have paid nearly a hundred francs.to such purpose she meditated that, one spring day as they jogged on alone, when he made his customary inquiry: "aren't we going to have our bit of sport yet?" she replied:"yes, if you like, monsieur polyte."he was not at all surprised, and clambered over the back of his seat, murmuring with a complacent air:"come along, then. i knew you'd come to it some day."the old white horse trotted so gently that she seemed to be dancing upon the same spot, deaf to the voice which cried at intervals, from the depths of the vehicle: "gee up, old girl! gee up, then!"three months later celeste discovered that she was going to have a child.all this she had told her mother in a tearful voice. pale with fury, the old woman asked:"well, what did it cost?""four months; that makes eight francs, doesn't it?" replied celeste.at that the peasant woman's fury was utterly unleashed, and, falling once more upon her daughter, she beat her a second time until she was out of breath. then she rose and said:"have you told him about the baby?""no, of course not.""why haven't you told him?""because very likely he'd have made me pay for all the free rides!"the old woman pondered awhile, then picked up her milkpails."come on, get up, and try to walk home," she said, and, after a pause, continued:"and don't tell him as long as he doesn't notice anything, and we'll make six or eight months' fares out of him."and celeste, who had risen, still crying, dishevelled and swollen round the eyes, started off again with dragging steps, murmuring:"of course i won't say."society called him handsome signoles. his name was viscount gontran-joseph de signoles.an orphan, and possessed of an adequate income, he cut a dash, as the saying is. he had a good figure and a good carriage, a sufficient flow of words to pass for wit, a certain natural grace, an air of nobility and pride, a gallant moustache and an eloquent eye, attributes which women like.he was in demand in drawing-rooms, sought after for valses, and in men he inspired that smiling hostility which is reserved for vital and attractive rivals. he had been suspected of several love-affairs of a sort calculated to create a good opinion of a youngster. he lived a happy, care-free life, in the most complete well-being of body and mind. he was known to be a fine swordsman and a still finer shot with the pistol."when i come to fight a duel," he would say, "i shall choose pistols. with that weapon, i'm sure of killing my man."one evening, he went to the theatre with two ladies, quite young, friends of his, whose husbands were also of the party, and after the performance he invited them to take ices at tortoni's.they had been sitting there for a few minutes when he noticed a gentleman at a neighbouring table staring obstinately at one of the ladies of the party. she seemed embarrassed and ill at ease, and bent her head. at last she said to her husband:"there's a man staring at me. i don't know him; do you?"the husband, who had seen nothing, raised his eyes, but declared:"no, not in the least."half smiling, half in anger, she replied:"it's very annoying; the creature's spoiling my ice."her husband shrugged his shoulders."deuce take him, don't appear to notice it. if we had to deal with all the discourteous people one meets, we'd never have done with them."but the viscount had risen abruptly. he could not permit this stranger to spoil an ice of his giving. it was to him that the insult was addressed, since it was at his invitation and on his account that his friends had come to the cafã©. the affair was no business of anyone but himself.he went up to the man and said:"you have a way of looking at those ladies, sir, which i cannot stomach. please be so good as to set a limit to your persistence.""you hold your tongue," replied the other."take care, sir," retorted the viscount, clenching his teeth; "you'll force me to overstep the bounds of common politeness."the gentleman replied with a single word, a vile word which rang across the cafã© from one end to the other, and, like the release of a spring, jerked every person present into an abrupt movement. all those with their backs towards him turned round, all the rest raised their heads; three waiters spun round on their heels like tops; the two ladies behind the counter started, then the whole upper half of their bodies twisted round, as though they were a couple of automata worked by the same handle.there was a profound silence. then suddenly a sharp noise resounded in the air. the viscount had boxed his adversary's ears. every one rose to intervene. cards were exchanged.back in his home, the viscount walked for several minutes up and down his room with long quick strides. he was too excited to think. a solitary idea dominated his mind: "a duel"; but as yet the idea stirred in him no emotion of any kind. he had done what he was compelled to do; he had shown himself to be what he ought to be. people would talk of it, would approve of him, congratulate him. he repeated aloud, speaking as a man speaks in severe mental distress:"what a hound the fellow is!"then he sat down and began to reflect. in the morning he must find seconds. whom should he choose? he searched his mind for the most important and celebrated names of his acquaintance. at last he decided on the marquis de la tour-noire and colonel bourdin, an aristocrat and a soldier; they would do excellently. their names would look well in the papers. he realised that he was thirsty, and drank three glasses of water one after the other; then he began to walk up and down again. he felt full of energy. if he played the gallant, showed himself determined, insisted on the most strict and dangerous arrangements, demanded a serious duel, a thoroughly serious duel, a positively terrible duel, his adversary would probably retire and apologize.he took up once more the card which he had taken from his pocket and thrown down upon the table, and read it again as he had read it before, in the cafã©, at a glance, and in the cab, by the light of each gas-lamp, on his way home."georges lamil, 51 rue moncey." nothing more.he examined the grouped letters; they seemed to him mysterious, full of confused meaning. georges lamil? who was this man? what did he do? why had he looked at the woman in that way? was it not revolting that a stranger, an unknown man, could thus disturb a man's life, without warning, just because he chose to fix his insolent eyes upon a woman? again the viscount repeated aloud:"what a hound!"then he remained standing stock-still, lost in thought, his eyes still fixed upon the card. a fury against this scrap of paper awoke in him, a fury of hatred in which was mingled a queer sensation of uneasiness. this sort of thing was so stupid! he took up an open knife which lay close at hand and thrust it through the middle of the printed name, as though he had stabbed a man.so he must fight. should he choose swords or pistols?--for he regarded himself as the insulted party. with swords there would be less risk, but with pistols there was a chance that his adversary might withdraw. it is very rare that a duel with swords is fatal, for mutual prudence is apt to restrain combatants from engaging at sufficiently close quarters for a point to penetrate deeply. with pistols he ran a grave risk of death; but he might also extricate himself from the affair with all the honours of the situation and without actually coming to a meeting."i must be firm," he said. "he will take flight."the sound of his voice set him trembling, and he looked round. he felt very nervous. he drank another glass of water, then began to undress for bed.as soon as he was in bed, he blew out the light and closed his eyes."i've the whole of to-morrow," he thought, "in which to set my affairs in order. i'd better sleep now, so that i shall be quite calm."he was very warm in the blankets, but he could not manage to compose himself to sleep. he turned this way and that, lay for five minutes upon his back, turned on to his left side, then rolled over on to his right.he was still thirsty. he got up to get a drink. a feeling of uneasiness crept over him:"is it possible that i'm afraid?"why did his heart beat madly at each familiar sound in his room? when the clock was about to strike, the faint squeak of the rising spring made him start; so shaken he was that for several seconds afterwards he had to open his mouth to get his breath.he began to reason with himself on the possibility of his being afraid."shall i be afraid?"no, of course he would not be afraid, since he was resolved to see the matter through, and had duly made up his mind to fight and not to tremble. but he felt so profoundly distressed that he wondered:"can a man be afraid in spite of himself?"he was attacked by this doubt, this uneasiness, this terror; suppose a force more powerful than himself, masterful, irresistible, overcame him, what would happen? yes, what might not happen? assuredly he would go to the place of the meeting, since he was quite ready to go. but supposing he trembled? supposing he fainted? he thought of the scene, of his reputation, his good name.there came upon him a strange need to get up and look at himself in the mirror. he relit his candle. when he saw his face reflected in the polished glass, he scarcely recognised it, it seemed to him as though he had never yet seen himself. his eyes looked to him enormous; and he was pale; yes, without doubt he was pale, very pale.he remained standing in front of the mirror. he put out his tongue, as though to ascertain the state of his health, and abruptly the thought struck him like a bullet:"the day after to-morrow, at this very hour, i may be dead."his heart began again its furious beating."the day after to-morrow, at this very hour, i may be dead. this person facing me, this me i see in the mirror, will be no more. why, here i am, i look at myself, i feel myself alive, and in twenty-four hours i shall be lying in that bed, dead, my eyes closed, cold, inanimate, vanished."he turned back towards the bed, and distinctly saw himself lying on his back in the very sheets he had just left. he had the hollow face of a corpse, his hands had the slackness of hands that will never make another movement.at that he was afraid of his bed, and, to get rid of the sight of it, went into the smoking-room. mechanically he picked up a cigar, lit it, and began to walk up and down again. he was cold; he went to the bell to wake his valet; but he stopped, even as he raised his hand to the rope."he will see that i am afraid."he did not ring; he lit the fire. his hands shook a little, with a nervous tremor, whenever they touched anything. his brain whirled, his troubled thoughts became elusive, transitory, and gloomy; his mind suffered all the effects of intoxication, as though he were actually drunk.over and over again he thought:"what shall i do? what is to become of me?"his whole body trembled, seized with a jerky shuddering; he got up and, going to the window, drew back the curtains.dawn was at hand, a summer dawn. the rosy sky touched the town, its roofs and walls, with its own hue. a broad descending ray, like the caress of the rising sun, enveloped the awakened world; and with the light, hope--a gay, swift, fierce hope--filled the viscount's heart! was he mad, that he had allowed himself to be struck down by fear, before anything was settled even, before his seconds had seen those of this georges lamil, before he knew whether he was going to fight?he washed, dressed, and walked out with a firm step.he repeated to himself, as he walked:"i must be energetic, very energetic. i must prove that i am not afraid."his seconds, the marquis and the colonel, placed themselves at his disposal, and after hearty handshakes discussed the conditions."you are anxious for a serious duel? " asked the colonel."yes, a very serious one," replied the viscount."you still insist on pistols?" said the marquis."yes.""you will leave us free to arrange the rest?"in a dry, jerky voice the viscount stated:"twenty paces; at the signal, raising the arm, and not lowering it. exchange of shots till one is seriously wounded.""they are excellent conditions," declared the colonel in a tone of satisfaction. "you shoot well, you have every chance."they departed. the viscount went home to wait for them. his agitation, momentarily quietened, was now growing minute by minute. he felt a strange shivering, a ceaseless vibration, down his arms, down his legs, in his chest; he could not keep still in one place, neither seated nor standing. there was not the least moistening of saliva in his mouth, and at every instant he made a violent movement of his tongue, as though to prevent it sticking to his palate.he was eager to have breakfast, but could not eat. then the idea came to him to drink in order to give himself courage, and he sent for a decanter of rum, of which he swallowed six liqueur glasses full one after the other.a burning warmth flooded through his body, followed immediately by a sudden dizziness of the mind and spirit."now i know what to do," he thought. "now it is all right."but by the end of an hour he had emptied the decanter, and his state of agitation had once more become intolerable. he was conscious of a wild need to roll on the ground, to scream, to bite. night was falling.the ringing of a bell gave him such a shock that he had not strength to rise and welcome his seconds.he did not even dare to speak to them, to say "good evening" to them, to utter a single word, for fear they guessed the whole thing by the alteration in his voice."everything is arranged in accordance with the conditions you fixed," observed the colonel. "at first your adversary claimed the privileges of the insulted party, but he yielded almost at once, and has accepted everything. his seconds are two military men.""thank you," said the viscount."pardon us," interposed the marquis, "if we merely come in and leave again immediately, but we have a thousand things to see to. we must have a good doctor, since the combat is not to end until a serious wound is inflicted, and you know that pistol bullets are no laughing-matter. we must appoint the ground, near a house to which we may carry the wounded man if necessary, etc. in fact, we shall be occupied for two or three hours arranging all that there is to arrange.""thank you," said the viscount a second time."you are all right?" asked the colonel. "you are calm?""yes, quite calm, thank you."the two men retired.when he realised that he was once more alone, he thought that he was going mad. his servant had lit the lamps, and he sat down at the table to write letters. after tracing, at the head of a sheet: "this is my will," he rose shivering and walked away, feeling incapable of connecting two ideas, of taking a resolution, of making any decision whatever.so he was going to fight! he could no longer avoid it. then what was the matter with him? he wished to fight, he had absolutely decided upon this plan of action and taken his resolve, and he now felt clearly, in spite of every effort of mind and forcing of will, that he could not retain even the strength necessary to get him to the place of meeting. he tried to picture the duel, his own attitude and the bearing of his adversary.from time to time his teeth chattered in his mouth with a slight clicking noise. he tried to read, and took down chateauvillard's code of duelling. then he wondered:"does my adversary go to shooting-galleries? is he well known? is he classified anywhere? how can i find out?"he bethought himself of baron vaux's book on marksmen with the pistol, and ran through it from end to end. georges lamil was not mentioned in it. yet if the man were not a good shot, he would surely not have promptly agreed to that dangerous weapon and those fatal conditions?he opened, in passing, a case by gastinne renette standing on a small table, and took out one of the pistols, then placed himself as though to shoot and raised his arm. but he was trembling from head to foot and the barrel moved in every direction.at that, he said to himself:"it's impossible. i cannot fight in this state."he looked at the end of the barrel, at the little, black, deep hole that spits death; he thought of the disgrace, of the whispers at the club, of the laughter in drawing-rooms, of the contempt of women, of the allusions in the papers, of the insults which cowards would fling at him.he was still looking at the weapon, and, raising the hammer, caught a glimpse of a cap gleaming beneath it like a tiny red flame; by good fortune or forgetfulness, the pistol had been left loaded. at the knowledge, he was filled with a confused inexplicable sense of joy.if, when face to face with the other man, he did not show a proper gallantry and calm, he would be lost for ever. he would be sullied, branded with a mark of infamy, hounded out of society. and he would not be able to achieve that calm, that swaggering poise; he knew it, he felt it. yet he was brave, since he wanted to fight i . . . he was brave, since. . . .the thought which hovered in him did not even fulfil itself in his mind; but, opening his mouth wide, he thrust in the barrel of his pistol with savage gesture until it reached his throat, and pressed on the trigger.when his valet ran in, at the sound of the report, he found him lying dead upon his back. a shower of blood had splashed the white paper on the table, and made a great red mark beneath these four words:"this is my will."the woman had died without pain, quietly, as a woman should whose life had been blameless. now she was resting in her bed, lying on her back, her eyes closed, her features calm, her long white hair carefully arranged as though she had done it up ten minutes before dying. the whole pale countenance of the dead woman was so collected, so calm, so resigned that one could feel what a sweet soul had lived in that body, what a quiet existence this old soul had led, how easy and pure the death of this parent had been.kneeling beside the bed, her son, a magistrate with inflexible principles, and her daughter, marguerite, known as sister eulalie, were weeping as though their hearts would break. she had, from childhood up, armed them with a strict moral code, teaching them religion, without weakness, and duty, without compromise. he, the man, had become a judge and handled the law as a weapon with which he smote the weak ones without pity. she, the girl, influenced by the virtue which had bathed her in this austere family, had become the bride of the church through her loathing for man.they had hardly known their father, knowing only that he had made their mother most unhappy, without being told any other details.the nun was wildly-kissing the dead woman's hand, an ivory hand as white as the large crucifix lying across the bed. on the other side of the long body the other hand seemed still to be holding the sheet in the death grasp; and the sheet had preserved the little creases as a memory of those last movements which precede eternal immobility.a few light taps on the door caused the two sobbing heads to look up, and the priest, who had just come from dinner, returned. he was red and out of breath from his interrupted digestion, for he had made himself a strong mixture of coffee and brandy in order to combat the fatigue of the last few nights and of the wake which was beginning.he looked sad, with that assumed sadness of the priest for whom death is a bread winner. he crossed himself and approaching with his professional gesture: "well, my poor children! i have come to help you pass these last sad hours." but sister eulalie suddenly arose. "thank you, "father, but my brother and i prefer to remain alone with her. this is our last chance to see her, and we wish to be together, all three of us, as we--we--used to be when we were small and our poor mo--mother----"grief and tears stopped her; she could not continue.once more serene, the priest bowed, thinking of his bed. "as you wish, my children." he kneeled, crossed himself, prayed, arose and went out quietly, murmuring: "she was a saint!"they remained alone, the dead woman and her children. the ticking of the clock, hidden in the shadow, could be heard distinctly, and through the open window drifted in the sweet smell of hay and of woods, together with the soft moonlight. no other noise could be heard over the land except the occasional croaking of the frog or the chirping of some belated insect. an infinite peace, a divine melancholy, a silent serenity surrounded this dead woman, seemed to be breathed out from her and to appease nature itself.then the judge, still kneeling, his head buried in the bed clothes, cried in a voice altered by grief and deadened by the sheets and blankets: "mamma, mamma, mamma!" and his sister, frantically striking her forehead against the woodwork, convulsed, twitching and trembling as in an epileptic fit, moaned: "jesus, jesus, mamma, jesus!" and both of them, shaken by a storm of grief, gasped and choked.the crisis slowly calmed down and they began to weep quietly, just as on the sea when a calm follows a squall.a rather long time passed and they arose and looked at their dead. and the memories, those distant memories, yesterday so dear, to-day so torturing, came to their minds with all the little forgotten details, those little intimate familiar details which bring back to life the one who has left. they recalled to each other circumstances, words, smiles, intonations of the mother who was no longer to speak to them. they saw her again happy and calm. they remembered things which she had said, and a little motion of the hand, like beating time, which she often used when emphasizing something important.and they loved her as they never had loved her before. they measured the depth of their grief, and thus they discovered how lonely they would find themselves.it was their prop, their guide, their whole youth, all the best part of their lives which was disappearing. it was their bond with life, their mother, their mamma, the connecting link with their forefathers which they would thenceforth miss. they now became solitary, lonely beings; they could no longer look back.the nun said to her brother: "you remember how mamma used always to read her old letters; they are all there in that drawer. let us, in turn, read them; let us live her whole life through tonight beside her! it would be like a road to the cross, like making the acquaintance of her mother, of our grandparents, whom we never knew, but whose letters are there and of whom she so often spoke, do you remember?"out of the drawer they took about ten little packages of yellow paper, tied with care and arranged one beside the other. they threw these relics on the bed and chose one of them on which the word "father" was written. they opened and read it.it was one of those old-fashioned letters which one finds in old family desk drawers, those epistles which smell of another century. the first one started: "my dear," another one: "my beautiful little girl," others: "my dear child," or: "my dear daughter." and suddenly the nun began to read aloud, to read over to the dead woman her whole history, all her tender memories. the judge, resting his elbow on the bed, was listening with his eyes fastened on his mother. the motionless body seemed happy.sister eulalie, interrupting herself, said suddenly:"these ought to be put in the grave with her; they ought to be used as a shroud and she ought to be buried in it." she took another package, on which no name was written. she began to read in a firm voice: "my adored one, i love you wildly. since yesterday i have been suffering the tortures of the damned, haunted by our memory. i feel your lips against mine, your eyes in mine, your breast against mine. i love you, i love you! you have driven me mad. my arms open, i gasp, moved by a wild desire to hold you again. my whole soul and body cries out for you, wants you. i have kept in my mouth the taste of your kisses--"the judge had straightened himself up. the nun stopped reading. he snatched the letter from her and looked for the signature. there was none, but only under the words, "the man who adores you," the name "henry." their father's name was rene. therefore this was not from him. the son then quickly rummaged through the package of letters, took one out and read: "i can no longer live without your caresses." standing erect, severe as when sitting on the bench, he looked unmoved at the dead woman. the nun, straight as a statue, tears trembling in the corners of her eyes, was watching her brother, waiting. then he crossed the room slowly, went to the window and stood there, gazing out into the dark night.when he turned around again sister eulalie, her eyes dry now, was still standing near the bed, her head bent down.he stepped forward, quickly picked up the letters and threw them pell-mell back into the drawer. then he closed the curtains of the bed.when daylight made the candles on the table turn pale the son slowly left his armchair, and without looking again at the mother upon whom he had passed sentence, severing the tie that united her to son and daughter, he said slowly: "let us now retire, sister."to leon chapron.marambot opened the letter which his servant denis gave him and smiled.for twenty years denis has been a servant in this house. he was a short, stout, jovial man, who was known throughout the countryside as a model servant. he asked:"is monsieur pleased? has monsieur received good news?"m. marambot was not rich. he was an old village druggist, a bachelor, who lived on an income acquired with difficulty by selling drugs to the farmers. he answered:"yes, my boy. old man malois is afraid of the law-suit with which i am threatening him. i shall get my money to-morrow. five thousand francs are not liable to harm the account of an old bachelor."m. marambot rubbed his hands with satisfaction. he was a man of quiet temperament, more sad than gay, incapable of any prolonged effort, careless in business.he could undoubtedly have amassed a greater income had he taken advantage of the deaths of colleagues established in more important centers, by taking their places and carrying on their business. but the trouble of moving and the thought of all the preparations had always stopped him. after thinking the matter over for a few days, he would be satisfied to say:"bah! i'll wait until the next time. i'll not lose anything by the delay. i may even find something better."denis, on the contrary, was always urging his master to new enterprises. of an energetic temperament, he would continually repeat:"oh! if i had only had the capital to start out with, i could have made a fortune! one thousand francs would do me."m. marambot would smile without answering and would go out in his little garden, where, his hands behind his back, he would walk about dreaming.all day long, denis sang the joyful refrains of the folk-songs of the district. he even showed an unusual activity, for he cleaned all the windows of the house, energetically rubbing the glass, and singing at the top of his voice.m. marambot, surprised at his zeal, said to him several times, smiling:"my boy, if you work like that there will be nothing left for you to do to-morrow."the following day, at about nine o'clock in the morning, the postman gave denis four letters for his master, one of them very heavy. m. marambot immediately shut himself up in his room until late in the afternoon. he then handed his servant four letters for the mail. one of them was addressed to m. malois; it was undoubtedly a receipt for the money.denis asked his master no questions; he appeared to be as sad and gloomy that day as he had seemed joyful the day before.night came. m. marambot went to bed as usual and slept.he was awakened by a strange noise. he sat up in his bed and listened. suddenly the door opened, and denis appeared, holding in one hand a candle and in the other a carving knife, his eyes staring, his face contracted as though moved by some deep emotion; he was as pale as a ghost.m. marambot, astonished, thought that he was sleep-walking, and he was going to get out of bed and assist him when the servant blew out the light and rushed for the bed. his master stretched out his hands to receive the shock which knocked him over on his back; he was trying to seize the hands of his servant, whom he now thought to be crazy, in order to avoid the blows which the latter was aiming at him.he was struck by the knife; once in the shoulder, once in the forehead and the third time in the chest. he fought wildly, waving his arms around in the darkness, kicking and crying:"denis! denis! are you mad? listen, denis!"but the latter, gasping for breath, kept up his furious attack always striking, always repulsed, sometimes with a kick, sometimes with a punch, and rushing forward again furiously.m. marambot was wounded twice more, once in the leg and once in the stomach. but, suddenly, a thought flashed across his mind, and he began to shriek:"stop, stop, denis, i have not yet received my money!"the man immediately ceased, and his master could hear his labored breathing in the darkness.m. marambot then went on:"i have received nothing. m. malois takes back what he said, the law-suit will take place; that is why you carried the letters to the mail. just read those on my desk."with a final effort, he reached for his matches and lit the candle.he was covered with blood. his sheets, his curtains, and even the walls, were spattered with red. denis, standing in the middle of the room, was also bloody from head to foot.when he saw the blood, m. marambot thought himself dead, and fell unconscious.at break of day he revived. it was some time, however, before he regained his senses, and was able to understand or remember. but, suddenly, the memory of the attack and of his wounds returned to him, and he was filled with such terror that he closed his eyes in order not to see anything. after a few minutes he grew calmer and began to think. he had not died' immediately, therefore he might still recover. he felt weak, very weak; but he had no real pain, although he noticed an uncomfortable smarting sensation in several parts of his body. he also felt icy cold, and all wet, and as though wrapped up in bandages. he thought that this dampness came from the blood which he had lost; and he shivered at the dreadful thought of this red liquid which had come from his veins and covered his bed. the idea of seeing this terrible spectacle again so upset him that he kept his eyes closed with all his strength, as though they might open in spite of himself.what had become of denis? he had probably escaped.but what could he, marambot, do now? get up? call for help? but if he should make the slightest motions, his wounds would undoubtedly open up again and he would die from loss of blood.suddenly he heard the door of his room open. his heart almost stopped. it was certainly denis who was coming to finish him up. he held his breath in order to make the murderer think that he had been successful.he felt his sheet being lifted up, and then someone feeling his stomach. a sharp pain near his hip made him start. he was being very gently washed with cold water. therefore, someone must have discovered the misdeed and he was being cared for. a wild joy seized him; but prudently, he did not wish to show that he was conscious. he opened one eye, just one, with the greatest precaution.he recognized denis standing beside him, denis himself! mercy! he hastily closed his eye again.denis! what could he be doing? what did he want? what awful scheme could he now be carrying out?what was he doing? well, he was washing him in order to hide the traces of his crime! and he would now bury him in the garden, under ten feet of earth, so that no one could discover him! or perhaps under the wine cellar! and m. marambot began to tremble like a leaf. he kept saying to himself: "i am lost, lost!" he closed his eyes so as not to see the knife as it descended for the final stroke. it did not come. denis was now lifting him up and bandaging him. then he began carefully to dress the wound on his leg, as his master had taught him to do.there was no longer any doubt. his servant, after wishing to kill him, was trying to save him.then m. marambot, in a dying voice, gave him the practical piece of advice:"wash the wounds in a dilute solution of carbolic acid!"denis answered:"this is what i am doing, monsieur."m. marambot opened both his eyes. there was no sign of blood either on the bed, on the walls, or on the murderer. the wounded man was stretched out on clean white sheets.the two men looked at each other.finally m. marambot said calmly:"you have been guilty of a great crime."denis answered:"i am trying to make up for it, monsieur. if you will not tell on me, i will serve you as faithfully as in the past."this was no time to anger his servant. m. marambot murmured as he closed his eyes:"i swear not to tell on you."denis saved his master. he spent days and nights without sleep, never leaving the sick room, preparing drugs, broths, potions, feeling his pulse, anxiously counting the beats, attending him with the skill of a trained nurse and the devotion of a son.he continually asked:"well, monsieur, how do you feel?"m. marambot would answer in a weak voice:"a little better, my boy, thank you."and when the sick man would wake up at night, he would often see his servant seated in an armchair, weeping silently.never had the old druggist been so cared for, so fondled, so spoiled. at first he had said to himself:"as soon as i am well i shall get rid of this rascal."he was now convalescing, and from day to day he would put off dismissing his murderer. he thought that no one would ever show him such care and attention, for he held this man through fear; and he warned him that he had left a document with a lawyer denouncing him to the law if any new accident should occur.this precaution seemed to guarantee him against any future attack; and he then asked himself if it would not be wiser to keep this man near him, in order to watch him closely.just as formerly, when he would hesitate about taking some larger place of business, he could not make up his mind to any decision."there is always time," he would say to himself.denis continued to show himself an admirable servant. m. marambot was well. he kept him.one morning, just as he was finishing breakfast, he suddenly heard a great noise in the kitchen. he hastened in there. denis was struggling with two gendarmes. an officer was taking notes on his pad.as soon as he saw his master, the servant began to sob, exclaiming:"you told on me, monsieur, that's not right, after what you had promised me. you have broken your word of honor, monsieur marambot; that is not right, that's not right!"m. marambot, bewildered and distressed at being suspected, lifted his hand:"i swear to you before the lord, my boy that i did not tell on you. i haven't the slightest idea how the police could have found out about your attack on me."the officer started:"you say that he attacked you, m. marambot?"the bewildered druggist answered:"yes--but i did not tell on him--i haven't said a word--i swear it--he has served me excellently from that time on--"the officer pronounced severely:"i will take down your testimony. the law will take notice of this new action, of which it was ignorant, monsieur marambot. i was commissioned to arrest your servant for the theft of two ducks surreptitiously taken by him from m. duhamel of which act there are witnesses. i shall make a note of your information."then, turning toward his men, he ordered:"come on, bring him along!"the two gendarmes dragged denis out.the lawyer used a plea of insanity, contrasting the two misdeeds in order to strengthen his argument. he had clearly proved that the theft of the two ducks came from the same mental condition as the eight knife-wounds in the body of marambot. he had cunningly analyzed all the phases of this transitory condition of mental aberration, which could, doubtless, be cured by a few months' treatment in a reputable sanatorium. he had spoken in enthusiastic terms of the continued devotion of this faithful servant, of the care with which he had surrounded his master, wounded by him in a moment of alienation.touched by this memory, m. marambot felt the tears rising to his eyes.the lawyer noticed it, opened his arms with a broad gesture, spreading out the long black sleeves of his robe like the wings of a bat, and exclaimed:"look, look, gentleman of the jury, look at those tears. what more can i say for my client? what speech, what argument, what reasoning would be worth these tears of his master? they, speak louder than i do, louder than the law; they cry: 'mercy, for the poor wandering mind of a while ago! they implore, they pardon, they bless!"he was silent and sat down.then the judge, turning to marambot, whose testimony had been excellent for his servant, asked him:"but, monsieur, even admitting that you consider this man insane, that does not explain why you should have kept him. he was none the less dangerous."marambot, wiping his eyes, answered:"well, your honor, what can you expect? nowadays it's so hard to find good servants--i could never have found a better one."denis was acquitted and put in a sanatorium at his master's expense.the peasant and the doctor stood on opposite sides of the bed, beside the old, dying woman. she was calm and resigned and her mind quite clear as she looked at them and listened to their conversation. she was going to die, and she did not rebel at it, for her time was come, as she was ninety-two.the july sun streamed in at the window and the open door and cast its hot flames on the uneven brown clay floor, which had been stamped down by four generations of clodhoppers. the smell of the fields came in also, driven by the sharp wind and parched by the noontide heat. the grasshoppers chirped themselves hoarse, and filled the country with their shrill noise, which was like that of the wooden toys which are sold to children at fair time.the doctor raised his voice and said: "honore, you cannot leave your mother in this state; she may die at any moment." and the peasant, in great distress, replied: "but i must get in my wheat, for it has been lying on the ground a long time, and the weather is just right for it; what do you say about it, mother?" and the dying old woman, still tormented by her norman avariciousness, replied yes with her eyes and her forehead, and thus urged her son to get in his wheat, and to leave her to die alone.but the doctor got angry, and, stamping his foot, he said: "you are no better than a brute, do you hear, and i will not allow you to do it, do you understand? and if you must get in your wheat today, go and fetch rapet's wife and make her look after your mother; i will have it, do you understand me? and if you do not obey me, i will let you die like a dog, when you are ill in your turn; do you hear?"the peasant, a tall, thin fellow with slow movements, who was tormented by indecision, by his fear of the doctor and his fierce love of saving, hesitated, calculated, and stammered out: "how much does la rapet charge for attending sick people?" "how should i know?" the doctor cried. "that depends upon how long she is needed. settle it with her, by heaven! but i want her to be here within an hour, do you hear?"so the man decided. "i will go for her," he replied; "don't get angry, doctor." and the latter left, calling out as he went: "be careful, be very careful, you know, for i do not joke when i am angry!" as soon as they were alone the peasant turned to his mother and said in a resigned voice: "i will go and fetch la rapet, as the man will have it. don't worry till i get back."and he went out in his turn.la rapet, who was an old washerwoman, watched the dead and the dying of the neighborhood, and then, as soon as she had sewn her customers into that linen cloth from which they would emerge no more, she went and took up her iron to smooth out the linen of the living. wrinkled like a last year's apple, spiteful, envious, avaricious with a phenomenal avarice, bent double, as if she had been broken in half across the loins by the constant motion of passing the iron over the linen, one might have said that she had a kind of abnormal and cynical love of a death struggle. she never spoke of anything but of the people she had seen die, of the various kinds of deaths at which she had been present, and she related with the greatest minuteness details which were always similar, just as a sportsman recounts his luck.when honore bontemps entered her cottage, he found her preparing the starch for the collars of the women villagers, and he said: "good-evening; i hope you are pretty well, mother rapet?"she turned her head round to look at him, and said: "as usual, as usual, and you?" "oh! as for me, i am as well as i could wish, but my mother is not well." "your mother?" "yes, my mother!" "what is the matter with her?" "she is going to turn up her toes, that's what's the matter with her!"the old woman took her hands out of the water and asked with sudden sympathy: "is she as bad as all that?" "the doctor says she will not last till morning." "then she certainly is very bad!" honore hesitated, for he wanted to make a few preparatory remarks before coming to his proposition; but as he could hit upon nothing, he made up his mind suddenly."how much will you ask to stay with her till the end? you know that i am not rich, and i can not even afford to keep a servant girl. it is just that which has brought my poor mother to this state--too much worry and fatigue! she did the work of ten, in spite of her ninety-two years. you don't find any made of that stuff nowadays!"la rapet answered gravely: "there are two prices: forty sous by day and three francs by night for the rich, and twenty sous by day and forty by night for the others. you shall pay me the twenty and forty." but the, peasant reflected, for he knew his mother well. he knew how tenacious of life, how vigorous and unyielding she was, and she might last another week, in spite of the doctor's opinion; and so he said resolutely: "no, i would rather you would fix a price for the whole time until the end. i will take my chance, one way or the other. the doctor says she will die very soon. if that happens, so much the better for you, and so much the worse for her, but if she holds out till to-morrow or longer, so much the better for her and so much the worse for you!"the nurse looked at the man in astonishment, for she had never treated a death as a speculation, and she hesitated, tempted by the idea of the possible gain, but she suspected that he wanted to play her a trick. "i can say nothing until i have seen your mother," she replied."then come with me and see her."she washed her hands, and went with him immediately.they did not speak on the road; she walked with short, hasty steps, while he strode on with his long legs, as if he were crossing a brook at every step.the cows lying down in the fields, overcome by the heat, raised their heads heavily and lowed feebly at the two passers-by, as if to ask them for some green grass.when they got near the house, honore bontemps murmured: "suppose it is all over?" and his unconscious wish that it might be so showed itself in the sound of his voice.but the old woman was not dead. she was lying on her back, on her wretched bed, her hands covered with a purple cotton counterpane, horribly thin, knotty hands, like the claws of strange animals, like crabs, half closed by rheumatism, fatigue and the work of nearly a century which she had accomplished.la rapet went up to the bed and looked at the dying woman, felt her pulse, tapped her on the chest, listened to her breathing, and asked her questions, so as to hear her speak; and then, having looked at her for some time, she went out of the room, followed by honore. her decided opinion was that the old woman would not last till night. he asked: "well?" and the sick-nurse replied: "well, she may last two days, perhaps three. you will have to give me six francs, everything included.""six francs! six francs!" he shouted. "are you out of your mind? i tell you she cannot last more than five or six hours!" and they disputed angrily for some time, but as the nurse said she must go home, as the time was going by, and as his wheat would not come to the farmyard of its own accord, he finally agreed to her terms."very well, then, that is settled; six francs, including everything, until the corpse is taken out."and he went away, with long strides, to his wheat which was lying on the ground under the hot sun which ripens the grain, while the sick-nurse went in again to the house.she had brought some work with her, for she worked without ceasing by the side of the dead and dying, sometimes for herself, sometimes for the family which employed her as seamstress and paid her rather more in that capacity. suddenly, she asked: "have you received the last sacraments, mother bontemps?"the old peasant woman shook her head, and la rapet, who was very devout, got up quickly:"good heavens, is it possible? i will go and fetch the cure"; and she rushed off to the parsonage so quickly that the urchins in the street thought some accident had happened, when they saw her running.the priest came immediately in his surplice, preceded by a choir boy who rang a bell to announce the passage of the host through the parched and quiet country. some men who were working at a distance took off their large hats and remained motionless until the white vestment had disappeared behind some farm buildings; the women who were making up the sheaves stood up to make the sign of the cross; the frightened black hens ran away along the ditch until they reached a well-known hole, through which they suddenly disappeared, while a foal which was tied in a meadow took fright at the sight of the surplice and began to gallop round and round, kicking out every now and then. the acolyte, in his red cassock, walked quickly, and the priest, with his head inclined toward one shoulder and his square biretta on his head, followed him, muttering some prayers; while last of all came la rapet, bent almost double as if she wished to prostrate herself, as she walked with folded hands as they do in church.honore saw them pass in the distance, and he asked: "where is our priest going?" his man, who was more intelligent, replied: "he is taking the sacrament to your mother, of course!"the peasant was not surprised, and said: "that may be," and went on with his work.mother bontemps confessed, received absolution and communion, and the priest took his departure, leaving the two women alone in the suffocating room, while la rapet began to look at the dying woman, and to ask herself whether it could last much longer.the day was on the wane, and gusts of cooler air began to blow, causing a view of epinal, which was fastened to the wall by two pins, to flap up and down; the scanty window curtains, which had formerly been white, but were now yellow and covered with fly-specks, looked as if they were going to fly off, as if they were struggling to get away, like the old woman's soul.lying motionless, with her eyes open, she seemed to await with indifference that death which was so near and which yet delayed its coming. her short breathing whistled in her constricted throat. it would stop altogether soon, and there would be one woman less in the world; no one would regret her.at nightfall honore returned, and when he went up to the bed and saw that his mother was still alive, he asked: "how is she?" just as he had done formerly when she had been ailing, and then he sent la rapet away, saying to her: "to-morrow morning at five o'clock, without fail." and she replied: "to-morrow, at five o'clock."she came at daybreak, and found honore eating his soup, which he had made himself before going to work, and the sick-nurse asked him: "well, is your mother dead?" "she is rather better, on the contrary," he replied, with a sly look out of the corner of his eyes. and he went out.la rapet, seized with anxiety, went up to the dying woman, who remained in the same state, lethargic and impassive, with her eyes open and her hands clutching the counterpane. the nurse perceived that this might go on thus for two days, four days, eight days, and her avaricious mind was seized with fear, while she was furious at the sly fellow who had tricked her, and at the woman who would not die.nevertheless, she began to work, and waited, looking intently at the wrinkled face of mother bontemps. when honore returned to breakfast he seemed quite satisfied and even in a bantering humor. he was decidedly getting in his wheat under very favorable circumstances.la rapet was becoming exasperated; every minute now seemed to her so much time and money stolen from her. she felt a mad inclination to take this old woman, this, headstrong old fool, this obstinate old wretch, and to stop that short, rapid breath, which was robbing her of her time and money, by squeezing her throat a little. but then she reflected on the danger of doing so, and other thoughts came into her head; so she went up to the bed and said: "have you ever seen the devil?" mother bontemps murmured: "no."then the sick-nurse began to talk and to tell her tales which were likely to terrify the weak mind of the dying woman. some minutes before one dies the devil appears, she said, to all who are in the death throes. he has a broom in his hand, a saucepan on his head, and he utters loud cries. when anybody sees him, all is over, and that person has only a few moments longer to live. she then enumerated all those to whom the devil had appeared that year: josephine loisel, eulalie ratier, sophie padaknau, seraphine grospied.mother bontemps, who had at last become disturbed in mind, moved about, wrung her hands, and tried to turn her head to look toward the end of the room. suddenly la rapet disappeared at the foot of the bed. she took a sheet out of the cupboard and wrapped herself up in it; she put the iron saucepan on her head, so that its three short bent feet rose up like horns, and she took a broom in her right hand and a tin pail in her left, which she threw up suddenly, so that it might fall to the ground noisily.when it came down, it certainly made a terrible noise. then, climbing upon a chair, the nurse lifted up the curtain which hung at the bottom of the bed, and showed herself, gesticulating and uttering shrill cries into the iron saucepan which covered her face, while she menaced the old peasant woman, who was nearly dead, with her broom.terrified, with an insane expression on her face, the dying woman made a superhuman effort to get up and escape; she even got her shoulders and chest out of bed; then she fell back with a deep sigh. all was over, and la rapet calmly put everything back into its place; the broom into the corner by the cupboard the sheet inside it, the saucepan on the hearth, the pail on the floor, and the chair against the wall. then, with professional movements, she closed the dead woman's large eyes, put a plate on the bed and poured some holy water into it, placing in it the twig of boxwood that had been nailed to the chest of drawers, and kneeling down, she fervently repeated the prayers for the dead, which she knew by heart, as a matter of business.and when honore returned in the evening he found her praying, and he calculated immediately that she had made twenty sows out of him, for she had only spent three days and one night there, which made five francs altogether, instead of the six which he owed her.there was not a breath of air stirring; a heavy mist was lying over the river. it was like a layer of cotton placed on the water. the banks themselves were indistinct, hidden behind strange fogs. but day was breaking and the hill was becoming visible. in the dawning light of day the plaster houses began to appear like white spots. cocks were crowing in the barnyard.on the other side of the river, hidden behind the fogs, just opposite frette, a slight noise from time to time broke the dead silence of the quiet morning. at times it was an indistinct plashing, like the cautious advance of a boat, then again a sharp noise like the rattle of an oar and then the sound of something dropping in the water. then silence.sometimes whispered words, coming perhaps from a distance, perhaps from quite near, pierced through these opaque mists. they passed by like wild birds which have slept in the rushes and which fly away at the first light of day, crossing the mist and uttering a low and timid sound which wakes their brothers along the shores.suddenly along the bank, near the village, a barely perceptible shadow appeared on the water. then it grew, became more distinct and, coming out of the foggy curtain which hung over the river, a flatboat, manned by two men, pushed up on the grass.the one who was rowing rose and took a pailful of fish from the bottom of the boat, then he threw the dripping net over his shoulder. his companion, who had not made a motion, exclaimed: "say, mailloche, get your gun and see if we can't land some rabbit along the shore."the other one answered: "all right. i'll be with you in a minute." then he disappeared, in order to hide their catch.the man who had stayed in the boat slowly filled his pipe and lighted it. his name was labouise, but he was called chicot, and was in partnership with maillochon, commonly called mailloche, to practice the doubtful and undefined profession of junk-gatherers along the shore.they were a low order of sailors and they navigated regularly only in the months of famine. the rest of the time they acted as junk-gatherers. rowing about on the river day and night, watching for any prey, dead or alive, poachers on the water and nocturnal hunters, sometimes ambushing venison in the saint-germain forests, sometimes looking for drowned people and searching their clothes, picking up floating rags and empty bottles; thus did labouise and maillochon live easily.at times they would set out on foot about noon and stroll along straight ahead. they would dine in some inn on the shore and leave again side by side. they would remain away for a couple of days; then one morning they would be seen rowing about in the tub which they called their boat.at joinville or at nogent some boatman would be looking for his boat, which had disappeared one night, probably stolen, while twenty or thirty miles from there, on the oise, some shopkeeper would be rubbing his hands, congratulating himself on the bargain he had made when he bought a boat the day before for fifty francs, which two men offered him as they were passing.maillochon reappeared with his gun wrapped up in rags. he was a man of forty or fifty, tall and thin, with the restless eye of people who are worried by legitimate troubles and of hunted animals. his open shirt showed his hairy chest, but he seemed never to have had any more hair on his face than a short brush of a mustache and a few stiff hairs under his lower lip. he was bald around the temples. when he took off the dirty cap that he wore his scalp seemed to be covered with a fluffy down, like the body of a plucked chicken.chicot, on the contrary, was red, fat, short and hairy. he looked like a raw beefsteak. he continually kept his left eye closed, as if he were aiming at something or at somebody, and when people jokingly cried to him, "open your eye, labouise!" he would answer quietly: "never fear, sister, i open it when there's cause to."he had a habit of calling every one "sister," even his scavenger companion.he took up the oars again, and once more the boat disappeared in the heavy mist, which was now turned snowy white in the pink-tinted sky."what kind of lead did you take, maillochon?" labouise asked."very small, number nine; that's the best for rabbits."they were approaching the other shore so slowly, so quietly that no noise betrayed them. this bank belongs to the saint-germain forest and is the boundary line for rabbit hunting. it is covered with burrows hidden under the roots of trees, and the creatures at daybreak frisk about, running in and out of the holes.maillochon was kneeling in the bow, watching, his gun hidden on the floor. suddenly he seized it, aimed, and the report echoed for some time throughout the quiet country.labouise, in a few strokes, touched the beach, and his companion, jumping to the ground, picked up a little gray rabbit, not yet dead.then the boat once more disappeared into the fog in order to get to the other side, where it could keep away from the game wardens.the two men seemed to be riding easily on the water. the weapon had disappeared under the board which served as a hiding place and the rabbit was stuffed into chicot's loose shirt.after about a quarter of an hour labouise asked: "well, sister, shall we get one more?""it will suit me," maillochon answered.the boat started swiftly down the current. the mist, which was hiding both shores, was beginning to rise. the trees could be barely perceived, as through a veil, and the little clouds of fog were floating up from the water. when they drew near the island, the end of which is opposite herblay, the two men slackened their pace and began to watch. soon a second rabbit was killed.then they went down until they were half way to conflans. here they stopped their boat, tied it to a tree and went to sleep in the bottom of it.from time to time labouise would sit up and look over the horizon with his open eye. the last of the morning mist had disappeared and the large summer sun was climbing in the blue sky.on the other side of the river the vineyard-covered hill stretched out in a semicircle. one house stood out alone at the summit. everything was silent.something was moving slowly along the tow-path, advancing with difficulty. it was a woman dragging a donkey. the stubborn, stiff- jointed beast occasionally stretched out a leg in answer to its companion's efforts, and it proceeded thus, with outstretched neck and ears lying flat, so slowly that one could not tell when it would ever be out of sight.the woman, bent double, was pulling, turning round occasionally to strike the donkey with a stick.as soon as he saw her, labouise exclaimed: "say, mailloche!"mailloche answered: "what's the matter?""want to have some fun?""of course!""then hurry, sister; we're going to have a laugh."chicot took the oars. when he had crossed the river he stopped opposite the woman and called:"hey, sister!"the woman stopped dragging her donkey and looked.labouise continued: "what are you doing--going to the locomotive show?"the woman made no reply. chicot continued:"say, your trotter's prime for a race. where are you taking him at that speed?"at last the woman answered: "i'm going to macquart, at champioux, to have him killed. he's worthless."labouise answered: "you're right. how much do you think macquart will give you for him?"the woman wiped her forehead on the back of her hand and hesitated, saying: "how do i know? perhaps three francs, perhaps four."chicot exclaimed: "i'll give you five francs and your errand's done! how's that?"the woman considered the matter for a second and then exclaimed: "done!"the two men landed. labouise grasped the animal by the bridle. maillochon asked in surprise:"what do you expect to do with that carcass?"chicot this time opened his other eye in order to express his gaiety. his whole red face was grinning with joy. he chuckled: "don't worry, sister. i've got my idea."he gave five francs to the woman, who then sat down by the road to see what was going to happen. then labouise, in great humor, got the gun and held it out to maillochon, saying: "each one in turn; we're going after big game, sister. don't get so near or you'll kill it right away! you must make the pleasure last a little."he placed his companion about forty paces from the victim. the ass, feeling itself free, was trying to get a little of the tall grass, but it was so exhausted that it swayed on its legs as if it were about to fall.maillochon aimed slowly and said: "a little pepper for the ears; watch, chicot!" and he fired.the tiny shot struck the donkey's long ears and he began to shake them in order to get rid of the stinging sensation. the two men were doubled up with laughter and stamped their feet with joy. the woman, indignant, rushed forward; she did not want her donkey to be tortured, and she offered to return the five francs. labouise threatened her with a thrashing and pretended to roll up his sleeves. he had paid, hadn't he? well, then, he would take a shot at her skirts, just to show that it didn't hurt. she went away, threatening to call the police. they could hear her protesting indignantly and cursing as she went her waymaillochon held out the gun to his comrade, saying: "it's your turn, chicot."labouise aimed and fired. the donkey received the charge in his thighs, but the shot was so small and came from such a distance that he thought he was being stung by flies, for he began to thrash himself with his tail.labouise sat down to laugh more comfortably, while maillochon reloaded the weapon, so happy that he seemed to sneeze into the barrel. he stepped forward a few paces, and, aiming at the same place that his friend had shot at, he fired again. this time the beast started, tried to kick and turned its head. at last a little blood was running. it had been wounded and felt a sharp pain, for it tried to run away with a slow, limping, jerky gallop.both men darted after the beast, maillochon with a long stride, labouise with the short, breathless trot of a little man. but the donkey, tired out, had stopped, and, with a bewildered look, was watching his two murderers approach. suddenly he stretched his neck and began to bray.labouise, out of breath, had taken the gun. this time he walked right up close, as he did not wish to begin the chase over again.when the poor beast had finished its mournful cry, like a last call for help, the man called: "hey, mailloche! come here, sister; i'm going to give him some medicine." and while the other man was forcing the animal's mouth open, chicot stuck the barrel of his gun down its throat, as if he were trying to make it drink a potion. then he said: "look out, sister, here she goes!"he pressed the trigger. the donkey stumbled back a few steps, fell down, tried to get up again and finally lay on its side and closed its eyes: the whole body was trembling, its legs were kicking as if it were, trying to run. a stream of blood was oozing through its teeth. soon it stopped moving. it was dead.the two men went along, laughing. it was over too quickly; they had not had their money's worth. maillochon asked: "well, what are we going to do now?"labouise answered: "don't worry, sister. get the thing on the boat; we're going to have some fun when night comes."they went and got the boat. the animal's body was placed on the bottom, covered with fresh grass, and the two men stretched out on it and went to sleep.toward noon labouise drew a bottle of wine, some bread and butter and raw onions from a hiding place in their muddy, worm-eaten boat, and they began to eat.when the meal was over they once more stretched out on the dead donkey and slept. at nightfall labouise awoke and shook his comrade, who was snoring like a buzzsaw. "come on, sister," he ordered.maillochon began to row. as they had plenty of time they went up the seine slowly. they coasted along the reaches covered with water-lilies, and the heavy, mud-covered boat slipped over the lily pads and bent the flowers, which stood up again as soon as they had passed.when they reached the wall of the eperon, which separates the saint- germain forest from the maisons-laffitte park, labouise stopped his companion and explained his idea to him. maillochon was moved by a prolonged, silent laugh.they threw into the water the grass which had covered the body, took the animal by the feet and hid it behind some bushes. then they got into their boat again and went to maisons-laffitte.the night was perfectly black when they reached the wine shop of old man jules. as soon as the dealer saw them he came up, shook hands with them and sat down at their table. they began to talk of one thing and another. by eleven o'clock the last customer had left and old man jules winked at labouise and asked: "well, have you got any?"labouise made a motion with his head and answered: "perhaps so, perhaps not!"the dealer insisted: "perhaps you've not nothing but gray ones?"chicot dug his hands into his flannel shirt, drew out the ears of a rabbit and declared: "three francs a pair!"then began a long discussion about the price. two francs sixty-five and the two rabbits were delivered. as the two men were getting up to go, old man jules, who had been watching them, exclaimed:"you have something else, but you won't say what."labouise answered: "possibly, but it is not for you; you're too stingy."the man, growing eager, kept asking: "what is it? something big? perhaps we might make a deal."labouise, who seemed perplexed, pretended to consult maillochon with a glance. then he answered in a slow voice: "this is how it is. we were in the bushes at eperon when something passed right near us, to the left, at the end of the wall. mailloche takes a shot and it drops. we skipped on account of the game people. i can't tell you what it is, because i don't know. but it's big enough. but what is it? if i told you i'd be lying, and you know, sister, between us everything's above-board."anxiously the man asked: "think it's venison?"labouise answered: "might be and then again it might not! venison?--uh! uh!--might be a little big for that! mind you, i don't say it's a doe, because i don't know, but it might be."still the dealer insisted: "perhaps it's a buck?"labouise stretched out his hand, exclaiming: "no, it's not that! it's not a buck. i should have seen the horns. no, it's not a buck!""why didn't you bring it with you?" asked the man."because, sister, from now on i sell from where i stand. plenty of people will buy. all you have to do is to take a walk over there, find the thing and take it. no risk for me."the innkeeper, growing suspicious, exclaimed "supposing he wasn't there!"labouise once more raised his hand and said:"he's there, i swear!--first bush to the left. what it is, i don't know. but it's not a buck, i'm positive. it's for you to find out what it is. twenty-five francs, cash down!"still the man hesitated: "couldn't you bring it?"maillochon exclaimed: "no, indeed! you know our price! take it or leave it!"the dealer decided: "it's a bargain for twenty francs!"and they shook hands over the deal.then he took out four big five-franc pieces from the cash drawer, and the two friends pocketed the money. labouise arose, emptied his glass and left. as he was disappearing in the shadows he turned round to exclaim: "it isn't a buck. i don't know what it is!--but it's there. i'll give you back your money if you find nothing!"and he disappeared in the darkness. maillochon, who was following him, kept punching him in the back to express his joy.the marriage of maitre simon lebrument with mademoiselle jeanne cordier was a surprise to no one. maitre lebrument had bought out the practice of maitre papillon; naturally, he had to have money to pay for it; and mademoiselle jeanne cordier had three hundred thousand francs clear in currency, and in bonds payable to bearer.maitre lebrument was a handsome man. he was stylish, although in a provincial way; but, nevertheless, he was stylish--a rare thing at boutigny-le-rebours.mademoiselle cordier was graceful and fresh-looking, although a trifle awkward; nevertheless, she was a handsome girl, and one to be desired.the marriage ceremony turned all boutigny topsy-turvy. everybody admired the young couple, who quickly returned home to domestic felicity, having decided simply to take a short trip to paris, after a few days of retirement.this tete-a-tete was delightful, maitre lebrument having shown just the proper amount of delicacy. he had taken as his motto: "everything comes to him who waits." he knew how to be at the same time patient and energetic. his success was rapid and complete.after four days, madame lebrument adored her husband. she could not get along without him. she would sit on his knees, and taking him by the ears she would say: "open your mouth and shut your eyes." he would open his mouth wide and partly close his eyes, and he would try to nip her fingers as she slipped some dainty between his teeth. then she would give him a kiss, sweet and long, which would make chills run up and down his spine. and then, in his turn, he would not have enough caresses to please his wife from morning to night and from night to morning.when the first week was over, he said to his young companion:"if you wish, we will leave for paris next tuesday. we will be like two lovers, we will go to the restaurants, the theatres, the concert halls, everywhere, everywhere!"she was ready to dance for joy."oh! yes, yes. let us go as soon as possible."he continued:"and then, as we must forget nothing, ask your father to have your dowry ready; i shall pay maitre papillon on this trip."she answered:"all right: i will tell him to-morrow morning."and he took her in his arms once more, to renew those sweet games of love which she had so enjoyed for the past week.the following tuesday, father-in-law and mother-in-law went to the station with their daughter and their son-in-law who were leaving for the capital.the father-in-law said:"i tell you it is very imprudent to carry so much money about in a pocketbook." and the young lawyer smiled."don't worry; i am accustomed to such things. you understand that, in my profession, i sometimes have as much as a million about me. in this manner, at least we avoid a great amount of red tape and delay. you needn't worry."the conductor was crying:"all aboard for paris!"they scrambled into a car, where two old ladies were already seated.lebrument whispered into his wife's ear:"what a bother! i won't be able to smoke."she answered in a low voice:"it annoys me too, but not an account of your cigar."the whistle blew and the train started. the trip lasted about an hour, during which time they did not say very much to each other, as the two old ladies did not go to sleep.as soon as they were in front of the saint-lazare station, maitre lebrument said to his wife:"dearie, let us first go over to the boulevard and get something to eat; then we can quietly return and get our trunk and bring it to the hotel."she immediately assented."oh! yes. let's eat at the restaurant. is it far?"he answered:"yes, it's quite a distance, but we will take the omnibus."she was surprised:"why don't we take a cab?"he began to scold her smilingly:"is that the way you save money? a cab for a five minutes' ride at six cents a minute! you would deprive yourself of nothing.""that's so," she said, a little embarrassed.a big omnibus was passing by, drawn by three big horses, which were trotting along. lebrument called out:"conductor! conductor!"the heavy carriage stopped. and the young lawyer, pushing his wife, said to her quickly:"go inside; i'm going up on top, so that i may smoke at least one cigarette before lunch."she had no time to answer. the conductor, who had seized her by the arm to help her up the step, pushed her inside, and she fell into a seat, bewildered, looking through the back window at the feet of her husband as he climbed up to the top of the vehicle.and she sat there motionless, between a fat man who smelled of cheap tobacco and an old woman who smelled of garlic.all the other passengers were lined up in silence--a grocer's boy, a young girl, a soldier, a gentleman with gold-rimmed spectacles and a big silk hat, two ladies with a self-satisfied and crabbed look, which seemed to say: "we are riding in this thing, but we don't have to," two sisters of charity and an undertaker. they looked like a collection of caricatures.the jolting of the wagon made them wag their heads and the shaking of the wheels seemed to stupefy them--they all looked as though they were asleep.the young woman remained motionless."why didn't he come inside with me?" she was saying to herself. an unaccountable sadness seemed to be hanging over her. he really need not have acted so.the sisters motioned to the conductor to stop, and they got off one after the other, leaving in their wake the pungent smell of camphor. the bus started tip and soon stopped again. and in got a cook, red-faced and out of breath. she sat down and placed her basket of provisions on her knees. a strong odor of dish-water filled the vehicle."it's further than i imagined," thought jeanne.the undertaker went out, and was replaced by a coachman who seemed to bring the atmosphere of the stable with him. the young girl had as a successor a messenger, the odor of whose feet showed that he was continually walking.the lawyer's wife began to feel ill at ease, nauseated, ready to cry without knowing why.other persons left and others entered. the stage went on through interminable streets, stopping at stations and starting again."how far it is!" thought jeanne. "i hope he hasn't gone to sleep! he has been so tired the last few days."little by little all the passengers left. she was left alone, all alone. the conductor cried:"vaugirard!"seeing that she did not move, he repeated:"vaugirard!"she looked at him, understanding that he was speaking to her, as there was no one else there. for the third time the man said:"vaugirard!"then she asked:"where are we?"he answered gruffly:"we're at vaugirard, of course! i have been yelling it for the last half hour!""is it far from the boulevard?" she said."which boulevard?""the boulevard des italiens.""we passed that a long time ago!""would you mind telling my husband?""your husband! where is he?""on the top of the bus.""on the top! there hasn't been anybody there for a long time."she started, terrified."what? that's impossible! he got on with me. look well! he must be there."the conductor was becoming uncivil:"come on, little one, you've talked enough! you can find ten men for every one that you lose. now run along. you'll find another one somewhere."tears were coming to her eyes. she insisted:"but, monsieur, you are mistaken; i assure you that you must be mistaken. he had a big portfolio under his arm."the man began to laugh:"a big portfolio! oh, yes! he got off at the madeleine. he got rid of you, all right! ha! ha! ha!"the stage had stopped. she got out and, in spite of herself, she looked up instinctively to the roof of the bus. it was absolutely deserted.then she began to cry, and, without thinking that anybody was listening or watching her, she said out loud:"what is going to become of me?"an inspector approached:"what's the matter?"the conductor answered, in a bantering tone of voice:"it's a lady who got left by her husband during the trip."the other continued:"oh! that's nothing. you go about your business."then he turned on his heels and walked away.she began to walk straight ahead, too bewildered, too crazed even to understand what had happened to her. where was she to go? what could she do? what could have happened to him? how could he have made such a mistake? how could he have been so forgetful?she had two francs in her pocket. to whom could she go? suddenly she remembered her cousin barral, one of the assistants in the offices of the ministry of the navy.she had just enough to pay for a cab. she drove to his house. he met her just as he was leaving for his office. he was carrying a large portfolio under his arm, just like lebrument.she jumped out of the carriage."henry!" she cried.he stopped, astonished:"jeanne! here--all alone! what are you doing? where have you come from?"her eyes full of tears, she stammered:"my husband has just got lost!""lost! where?""on an omnibus.""on an omnibus?"weeping, she told him her whole adventure.he listened, thought, and then asked:"was his mind clear this morning?""yes.""good. did he have much money with him?""yes, he was carrying my dowry.""your dowry! the whole of it?""the whole of it--in order to pay for the practice which he bought.""well, my dear cousin, by this time your husband must be well on his way to belgium."she could not understand. she kept repeating:"my husband--you say--""i say that he has disappeared with your--your capital--that's all!"she stood there, a prey to conflicting emotions, sobbing."then he is--he is--he is a villain!"and, faint from excitement, she leaned her head on her cousin's shoulder and wept.as people were stopping to look at them, he pushed her gently into the vestibule of his house, and, supporting her with his arm around her waist, he led her up the stairs, and as his astonished servant opened the door, he ordered:"sophie, run to the restaurant and get a luncheon for two. i am not going to the office to-day."the north wind was blowing a hurricane, driving through the sky big, black, heavy clouds from which the rain poured down on the earth with terrific violence.a high sea was raging and dashing its huge, slow, foamy waves along the coast with the rumbling sound of thunder. the waves followed each other close, rolling in as high as mountains, scattering the foam as they broke.the storm engulfed itself in the little valley of yport, whistling and moaning, tearing the shingles from the roofs, smashing the shutters, knocking down the chimneys, rushing through the narrow streets in such gusts that one could walk only by holding on to the walls, and children would have been lifted up like leaves and carried over the houses into the fields.the fishing smacks had been hauled high up on land, because at high tide the sea would sweep the beach. several sailors, sheltered behind the curved bottoms of their boats, were watching this battle of the sky and the sea.then, one by one, they went away, for night was falling on the storm, wrapping in shadows the raging ocean and all the battling elements.just two men remained, their hands plunged deep into their pockets, bending their backs beneath the squall, their woolen caps pulled down over their ears; two big normandy fishermen, bearded, their skin tanned through exposure, with the piercing black eyes of the sailor who looks over the horizon like a bird of prey.one of them was saying:"come on, jeremie, let's go play dominoes. it's my treat."the other hesitated a while, tempted on one hand by the game and the thought of brandy, knowing well that, if he went to paumelle's, he would return home drunk; held back, on the other hand, by the idea of his wife remaining alone in the house.he asked:"any one might think that you had made a bet to get me drunk every night. say, what good is it doing you, since it's always you that's treating?"nevertheless he was smiling at the idea of all this brandy drunk at the expense of another. he was smiling the contented smirk of an avaricious norman.mathurin, his friend, kept pulling him by the sleeve."come on, jeremie. this isn't the kind of a night to go home without anything to warm you up. what are you afraid of? isn't your wife going to warm your bed for you?"jeremie answered:"the other night i couldn't find the door--i had to be fished out of the ditch in front of the house!"he was still laughing at this drunkard's recollection, and he was unconsciously going toward paumelle's cafã©, where a light was shining in the window; he was going, pulled by mathurin and pushed by the wind, unable to resist these combined forces.the low room was full of sailors, smoke and noise. all these men, clad in woolens, their elbows on the tables, were shouting to make themselves heard. the more people came in, the more one had to shout in order to overcome the noise of voices and the rattling of dominoes on the marble tables.jeremie and mathurin sat down in a corner and began a game, and the glasses were emptied in rapid succession into their thirsty throats.then they played more games and drank more glasses. mathurin kept pouring and winking to the saloon keeper, a big, red-faced man, who chuckled as though at the thought of some fine joke; and jeremie kept absorbing alcohol and wagging his head, giving vent to a roar of laughter and looking at his comrade with a stupid and contented expression.all the customers were going away. every time that one of them would open the door to leave a gust of wind would blow into the cafã©, making the tobacco smoke swirl around, swinging the lamps at the end of their chains and making their flames flicker, and suddenly one could hear the deep booming of a breaking wave and the moaning of the wind.jeremie, his collar unbuttoned, was taking drunkard's poses, one leg outstretched, one arm hanging down and in the other hand holding a domino.they were alone now with the owner, who had come up to them, interested.he asked:"well, jeremie, how goes it inside? feel less thirsty after wetting your throat?"jeremie muttered:"the more i wet it, the drier it gets inside."the innkeeper cast a sly glance at mathurin. he said:"and your brother, mathurin, where's he now?"the sailor laughed silently:"don't worry; he's warm, all right."and both of them looked toward jeremie, who was triumphantly putting down the double six and announcing:"game!"then the owner declared:"well, boys, i'm goin' to bed. i will leave you the lamp and the bottle; there's twenty cents' worth in it. lock the door when you go, mathurin, and slip the key under the mat the way you did the other night."mathurin answered:"don't worry; it'll be all right."paumelle shook hands with his two customers and slowly went up the wooden stairs. for several minutes his heavy step echoed through the little house. then a loud creaking announced that he had got into bed.the two men continued to play. from time to time a more violent gust of wind would shake the whole house, and the two drinkers would look up, as though some one were about to enter. then mathurin would take the bottle and fill jeremie's glass. but suddenly the clock over the bar struck twelve. its hoarse clang sounded like the rattling of saucepans. then mathurin got up like a sailor whose watch is over."come on, jeremie, we've got to get out."the other man rose to his feet with difficulty, got his balance by leaning on the table, reached the door and opened it while his companion was putting out the light.as soon as they were in the street mathurin locked the door and then said:"well, so long. see you to-morrow night!"and he disappeared in the darkness.jeremie took a few steps, staggered, stretched out his hands, met a wall which supported him and began to stumble along. from time to time a gust of wind would sweep through the street, pushing him forward, making him run for a few steps; then, when the wind would die down, he would stop short, having lost his impetus, and once more he would begin to stagger on his unsteady drunkard's legs.he went instinctively toward his home, just as birds go to their nests. finally he recognized his door, and began to feel about for the keyhole and tried to put the key in it. not finding the hole, he began to swear. then he began to beat on the door with his fists, calling for his wife to come and help him:"melina! oh, melina!"as he leaned against the door for support, it gave way and opened, and jeremie, losing his prop, fell inside, rolling on his face into the middle of his room, and he felt something heavy pass over him and escape in the night.he was no longer moving, dazed by fright, bewildered, fearing the devil, ghosts, all the mysterious beings of darkness, and he waited a long time without daring to move. but when he found out that nothing else was moving, a little reason returned to him, the reason of a drunkard.gently he sat up. again he waited a long time, and at last, growing bolder, he called:"melina!"his wife did not answer.then, suddenly, a suspicion crossed his darkened mind, an indistinct, vague suspicion. he was not moving; he was sitting there in the dark, trying to gather together his scattered wits, his mind stumbling over incomplete ideas, just as his feet stumbled along.once more he asked:"who was it, melina? tell me who it was. i won't hurt you!"he waited, no voice was raised in the darkness. he was now reasoning with himself out loud."i'm drunk, all right! i'm drunk! and he filled me up, the dog; he did it, to stop my goin' home. i'm drunk!"and he would continue:"tell me who it was, melina, or somethin'll happen to you."after having waited again, he went on with the slow and obstinate logic of a drunkard:"he's been keeping me at that loafer paumelle's place every night, so as to stop my going home. it's some trick. oh, you damned carrion!"slowly he got on his knees. a blind fury was gaining possession of him, mingling with the fumes of alcohol.he continued:"tell me who it was, melina, or you'll get a licking--i warn you!"he was now standing, trembling with a wild fury, as though the alcohol had set his blood on fire. he took a step, knocked against a chair, seized it, went on, reached the bed, ran his hands over it and felt the warm body of his wife.then, maddened, he roared:"so! you were there, you piece of dirt, and you wouldn't answer!"and, lifting the chair, which he was holding in his strong sailor's grip, he swung it down before him with an exasperated fury. a cry burst from the bed, an agonizing, piercing cry. then he began to thrash around like a thresher in a barn. and soon nothing more moved. the chair was broken to pieces, but he still held one leg and beat away with it, panting.at last he stopped to ask:"well, are you ready to tell me who it was?"melina did not answer.then tired out, stupefied from his exertion, he stretched himself out on the ground and slept.when day came a neighbor, seeing the door open, entered. he saw jeremie snoring on the floor, amid the broken pieces of a chair, and on the bed a pulp of flesh and blood.i was to see my old friend, simon radevin, of whom i had lost sight for fifteen years. at one time he was my most intimate friend, the friend who knows one's thoughts, with whom one passes long, quiet, happy evenings, to whom one tells one's secret love affairs, and who seems to draw out those rare, ingenious, delicate thoughts born of that sympathy that gives a sense of repose.for years we had scarcely been separated; we had lived, travelled, thought and dreamed together; had liked the same things, had admired the same books, understood the same authors, trembled with the same sensations, and very often laughed at the same individuals, whom we understood completely by merely exchanging a glance.then he married. he married, quite suddenly, a little girl from the provinces, who had come to paris in search of a husband. how in the world could that little thin, insipidly fair girl, with her weak hands, her light, vacant eyes, and her clear, silly voice, who was exactly like a hundred thousand marriageable dolls, have picked up that intelligent, clever young fellow? can any one understand these things? no doubt he had hoped for happiness, simple, quiet and long-enduring happiness, in the arms of a good, tender and faithful woman; he had seen all that in the transparent looks of that schoolgirl with light hair.he had not dreamed of the fact that an active, living and vibrating man grows weary of everything as soon as he understands the stupid reality, unless, indeed, he becomes so brutalized that he understands nothing whatever.what would he be like when i met him again? still lively, witty, light- hearted and enthusiastic, or in a state of mental torpor induced by provincial life? a man may change greatly in the course of fifteen years!the train stopped at a small station, and as i got out of the carriage, a stout, a very stout man with red cheeks and a big stomach rushed up to me with open arms, exclaiming: "george!" i embraced him, but i had not recognized him, and then i said, in astonishment: "by jove! you have not grown thin!" and he replied with a laugh:"what did you expect? good living, a good table and good nights! eating and sleeping, that is my existence!"i looked at him closely, trying to discover in that broad face the features i held so dear. his eyes alone had not changed, but i no longer saw the same expression in them, and i said to myself: "if the expression be the reflection of the mind, the thoughts in that head are not what they used to be formerly; those thoughts which i knew so well."yet his eyes were bright, full of happiness and friendship, but they had not that clear, intelligent expression which shows as much as words the brightness of the intellect. suddenly he said:"here are my two eldest children." a girl of fourteen, who was almost a woman, and a boy of thirteen, in the dress of a boy from a lycee, came forward in a hesitating and awkward manner, and i said in a low voice: "are they yours?" "of course they are," he replied, laughing. "how many have you?" "five! there are three more at home."he said this in a proud, self-satisfied, almost triumphant manner, and i felt profound pity, mingled with a feeling of vague contempt, for this vainglorious and simple reproducer of his species.i got into a carriage which he drove himself, and we set off through the town, a dull, sleepy, gloomy town where nothing was moving in the streets except a few dogs and two or three maidservants. here and there a shopkeeper, standing at his door, took off his hat, and simon returned his salute and told me the man's name; no doubt to show me that he knew all the inhabitants personally, and the thought struck me that he was thinking of becoming a candidate for the chamber of deputies, that dream of all those who bury themselves in the provinces.we were soon out of the town, and the carriage turned into a garden that was an imitation of a park, and stopped in front of a turreted house, which tried to look like a chateau."that is my den," said simon, so that i might compliment him on it. "it is charming," i replied.a lady appeared on the steps, dressed for company, and with company phrases all ready prepared. she was no longer the light-haired, insipid girl i had seen in church fifteen years previously, but a stout lady in curls and flounces, one of those ladies of uncertain age, without intellect, without any of those things that go to make a woman. in short, she was a mother, a stout, commonplace mother, a human breeding machine which procreates without any other preoccupation but her children and her cook-book.she welcomed me, and i went into the hall, where three children, ranged according to their height, seemed set out for review, like firemen before a mayor, and i said: "ah! ah! so there are the others?" simon, radiant with pleasure, introduced them: "jean, sophie and gontran."the door of the drawing-room was open. i went in, and in the depths of an easy-chair, i saw something trembling, a man, an old, paralyzed man. madame radevin came forward and said: "this is my grandfather, monsieur; he is eighty-seven." and then she shouted into the shaking old man's ears: "this is a friend of simon's, papa." the old gentleman tried to say "good-day" to me, and he muttered: "oua, oua, oua," and waved his hand, and i took a seat saying: "you are very kind, monsieur."simon had just come in, and he said with a laugh: "so! you have made grandpapa's acquaintance. he is a treasure, that old man; he is the delight of the children. but he is so greedy that he almost kills himself at every meal; you have no idea what he would eat if he were allowed to do as he pleased. but you will see, you will see. he looks at all the sweets as if they were so many girls. you never saw anything so funny; you will see presently."i was then shown to my room, to change my dress for dinner, and hearing a great clatter behind me on the stairs, i turned round and saw that all the children were following me behind their father; to do me honor, no doubt.my windows looked out across a dreary, interminable plain, an ocean of grass, of wheat and of oats, without a clump of trees or any rising ground, a striking and melancholy picture of the life which they must be leading in that house.a bell rang; it was for dinner, and i went downstairs. madame radevin took my arm in a ceremonious manner, and we passed into the dining-room. a footman wheeled in the old man in his armchair. he gave a greedy and curious look at the dessert, as he turned his shaking head with difficulty from one dish to the other.simon rubbed his hands: "you will be amused," he said; and all the children understanding that i was going to be indulged with the sight of their greedy grandfather, began to laugh, while their mother merely smiled and shrugged her shoulders, and simon, making a speaking trumpet of his hands, shouted at the old man: "this evening there is sweet creamed rice!" the wrinkled face of the grandfather brightened, and he trembled more violently, from head to foot, showing that he had understood and was very pleased. the dinner began."just look!" simon whispered. the old man did not like the soup, and refused to eat it; but he was obliged to do it for the good of his health, and the footman forced the spoon into his mouth, while the old man blew so energetically, so as not to swallow the soup, that it was scattered like a spray all over the table and over his neighbors. the children writhed with laughter at the spectacle, while their father, who was also amused, said: "is not the old man comical?"during the whole meal they were taken up solely with him. he devoured the dishes on the table with his eyes, and tried to seize them and pull them over to him with his trembling hands. they put them almost within his reach, to see his useless efforts, his trembling clutches at them, the piteous appeal of his whole nature, of his eyes, of his mouth and of his nose as he smelt them, and he slobbered on his table napkin with eagerness, while uttering inarticulate grunts. and the whole family was highly amused at this horrible and grotesque scene.then they put a tiny morsel on his plate, and he ate with feverish gluttony, in order to get something more as soon as possible, and when the sweetened rice was brought in, he nearly had a fit, and groaned with greediness, and gontran called out to him:"you have eaten too much already; you can have no more." and they pretended not to give him any. then he began to cry; he cried and trembled more violently than ever, while all the children laughed. at last, however, they gave him his helping, a very small piece; and as he ate the first mouthful, he made a comical noise in his throat, and a movement with his neck as ducks do when they swallow too large a morsel, and when he had swallowed it, he began to stamp his feet, so as to get more.i was seized with pity for this saddening and ridiculous tantalus, and interposed on his behalf:"come, give him a little more rice!" but simon replied: "oh! no, my dear fellow, if he were to eat too much, it would harm him, at his age."i held my tongue, and thought over those words. oh, ethics! oh, logic! oh, wisdom! at his age! so they deprived him of his only remaining pleasure out of regard for his health! his health! what would he do with it, inert and trembling wreck that he was? they were taking care of his life, so they said. his life? how many days? ten, twenty, fifty, or a hundred? why? for his own sake? or to preserve for some time longer the spectacle of his impotent greediness in the family.there was nothing left for him to do in this life, nothing whatever. he had one single wish left, one sole pleasure; why not grant him that last solace until he died?after we had played cards for a long time, i went up to my room and to bed; i was low-spirited and sad, sad, sad! and i sat at my window. not a sound could be heard outside but the beautiful warbling of a bird in a tree, somewhere in the distance. no doubt the bird was singing in a low voice during the night, to lull his mate, who was asleep on her eggs. and i thought of my poor friend's five children, and pictured him to myself, snoring by the side of his ugly wife.the two friends were getting near the end of their dinner. through the cafã© windows they could see the boulevard, crowded with people. they could feel the gentle breezes which are wafted over paris on warm summer evenings and make you feel like going out somewhere, you care not where, under the trees, and make you dream of moonlit rivers, of fireflies and of larks.one of the two, henri simon, heaved a deep sigh and said:"ah! i am growing old. it's sad. formerly, on evenings like this, i felt full of life. now, i only feel regrets. life is short!"he was perhaps forty-five years old, very bald and already growing stout.the other, pierre carnier, a trifle older, but thin and lively, answered:"well, my boy, i have grown old without noticing it in the least. i have always been merry, healthy, vigorous and all the rest. as one sees oneself in the mirror every day, one does not realize the work of age, for it is slow, regular, and it modifies the countenance so gently that the changes are unnoticeable. it is for this reason alone that we do not die of sorrow after two or three years of excitement. for we cannot understand the alterations which time produces. in order to appreciate them one would have to remain six months without seeing one's own face-- then, oh, what a shock!"and the women, my friend, how i pity the poor beings! all their joy, all their power, all their life, lies in their beauty, which lasts ten years."as i said, i aged without noticing it; i thought myself practically a youth, when i was almost fifty years old. not feeling the slightest infirmity, i went about, happy and peaceful."the revelation of my decline came to me in a simple and terrible manner, which overwhelmed me for almost six months--then i became resigned."like all men, i have often been in love, but most especially once."i met her at the seashore, at etretat, about twelve years ago, shortly after the war. there is nothing prettier than this beach during the morning bathing hour. it is small, shaped like a horseshoe, framed by high while cliffs, which are pierced by strange holes called the 'portes,' one stretching out into the ocean like the leg of a giant, the other short and dumpy. the women gather on the narrow strip of sand in this frame of high rocks, which they make into a gorgeous garden of beautiful gowns. the sun beats down on the shores, on the multicolored parasols, on the blue-green sea; and all is gay, delightful, smiling. you sit down at the edge of the water and you watch the bathers. the women come down, wrapped in long bath robes, which they throw off daintily when they reach the foamy edge of the rippling waves; and they run into the water with a rapid little step, stopping from time to time for a delightful little thrill from the cold water, a short gasp."very few stand the test of the bath. it is there that they can be judged, from the ankle to the throat. especially on leaving the water are the defects revealed, although water is a powerful aid to flabby skin."the first time that i saw this young woman in the water, i was delighted, entranced. she stood the test well. there are faces whose charms appeal to you at first glance and delight you instantly. you seem to have found the woman whom you were born to love. i had that feeling and that shock."i was introduced, and was soon smitten worse than i had ever been before. my heart longed for her. it is a terrible yet delightful thing thus to be dominated by a young woman. it is almost torture, and yet infinite delight. her look, her smile, her hair fluttering in the wind, the little lines of her face, the slightest movement of her features, delighted me, upset me, entranced me. she had captured me, body and soul, by her gestures, her manners, even by her clothes, which seemed to take on a peculiar charm as soon as she wore them. i grew tender at the sight of her veil on some piece of furniture, her gloves thrown on a chair. her gowns seemed to me inimitable. nobody had hats like hers."she was married, but her husband came only on saturday, and left on monday. i didn't concern myself about him, anyhow. i wasn't jealous of him, i don't know why; never did a creature seem to me to be of less importance in life, to attract my attention less than this man."but she! how i loved her! how beautiful, graceful and young she was! she was youth, elegance, freshness itself! never before had i felt so strongly what a pretty, distinguished, delicate, charming, graceful being woman is. never before had i appreciated the seductive beauty to be found in the curve of a cheek, the movement of a lip, the pinkness of an ear, the shape of that foolish organ called the nose."this lasted three months; then i left for america, overwhelmed with sadness. but her memory remained in me, persistent, triumphant. from far away i was as much hers as i had been when she was near me. years passed by, and i did not forget her. the charming image of her person was ever before my eyes and in my heart. and my love remained true to her, a quiet tenderness now, something like the beloved memory of the most beautiful and the most enchanting thing i had ever met in my life."twelve years are not much in a lifetime! one does not feel them slip by. the years follow each other gently and quickly, slowly yet rapidly, each one is long and yet so soon over! they add up so rapidly, they leave so few traces behind them, they disappear so completely, that, when one turns round to look back over bygone years, one sees nothing and yet one does not understand how one happens to be so old. it seemed to me, really, that hardly a few months separated me from that charming season on the sands of etretat."last spring i went to dine with some friends at maisons-laffitte."just as the train was leaving, a big, fat lady, escorted by four little girls, got into my car. i hardly looked at this mother hen, very big, very round, with a face as full as the moon framed in an enormous, beribboned hat."she was puffing, out of breath from having been forced to walk quickly. the children began to chatter. i unfolded my paper and began to read."we had just passed asnieres, when my neighbor suddenly turned to me and said:"'excuse me, sir, but are you not monsieur garnier?'"'yes, madame.'"then she began to laugh, the pleased laugh of a good woman; and yet it was sad."'you do not seem to recognize me.'"i hesitated. it seemed to me that i had seen that face somewhere; but where? when? i answered:"'yes--and no. i certainly know you, and yet i cannot recall your name.'"she blushed a little:"'madame julie lefevre.'"never had i received such a shock. in a second it seemed to me as though it were all over with me! i felt that a veil had been torn from my eyes and that i was going to make a horrible and heartrending discovery."so that was she! that big, fat, common woman, she! she had become the mother of these four girls since i had last seen her. and these little beings surprised me as much as their mother. they were part of her; they were big girls, and already had a place in life. whereas she no longer counted, she, that marvel of dainty and charming gracefulness. it seemed to me that i had seen her but yesterday, and this is how i found her again! was it possible? a poignant grief seized my heart; and also a revolt against nature herself, an unreasoning indignation against this brutal, injurious act of destruction."i looked at her, bewildered. then i took her hand in mine, and tears came to my eyes. i wept for her lost youth. for i did not know this fat lady."she was also excited, and stammered:"'i am greatly changed, am i not? what can you expect--everything has its time! you see, i have become a mother, nothing but a good mother. farewell to the rest, that is over. oh! i never expected you to recognize me if we met. you, too, have changed. it took me quite a while to be sure that i was not mistaken. your hair is all white. just think! twelve years ago! twelve years! my oldest girl is already ten.'"i looked at the child. and i recognized in her something of her mother's old charm, but something as yet unformed, something which promised for the future. and life seemed to me as swift as a passing train."we had reached maisons-laffitte. i kissed my old friend's hand. i had found nothing to utter but the most commonplace remarks. i was too much upset to talk."at night, alone, at home, i stood in front of the mirror for a long time, a very long time. and i finally remembered what i had been, finally saw in my mind's eye my brown mustache, my black hair and the youthful expression of my face. now i was old. farewell!"ihe was a clerk in the bureau of public education and lived at batignolles. he took the omnibus to paris every morning and always sat opposite a girl, with whom he fell in love.she was employed in a shop and went in at the same time every day. she was a little brunette, one of those girls whose eyes are so dark that they look like black spots, on a complexion like ivory. he always saw her coming at the corner of the same street, and she generally had to run to catch the heavy vehicle, and sprang upon the steps before the horses had quite stopped. then she got inside, out of breath, and, sitting down, looked round her.the first time that he saw her, francois tessier liked the face. one sometimes meets a woman whom one longs to clasp in one's arms without even knowing her. that girl seemed to respond to some chord in his being, to that sort of ideal of love which one cherishes in the depths of the heart, without knowing it.he looked at her intently, not meaning to be rude, and she became embarrassed and blushed. he noticed it, and tried to turn away his eyes; but he involuntarily fixed them upon her again every moment, although he tried to look in another direction; and, in a few days, they seemed to know each other without having spoken. he gave up his place to her when the omnibus was full, and got outside, though he was very sorry to do it. by this time she had got so far as to greet him with a little smile; and, although she always dropped her eyes under his looks, which she felt were too ardent, yet she did not appear offended at being looked at in such a manner.they ended by speaking. a kind of rapid friendship had become established between them, a daily freemasonry of half an hour, and that was certainly one of the most charming half hours in his life to him. he thought of her all the rest of the day, saw her image continually during the long office hours. he was haunted and bewitched by that floating and yet tenacious recollection which the form of a beloved woman leaves in us, and it seemed to him that if he could win that little person it would be maddening happiness to him, almost above human realization.every morning she now shook hands with him, and he preserved the sense of that touch and the recollection of the gentle pressure of her little fingers until the next day, and he almost fancied that he preserved the imprint on his palm. he anxiously waited for this short omnibus ride, while sundays seemed to him heartbreaking days. however, there was no doubt that she loved him, for one saturday, in spring, she promised to go and lunch with him at maisons-laffitte the next day.iishe was at the railway station first, which surprised him, but she said: "before going, i want to speak to you. we have twenty minutes, and that is more than i shall take for what i have to say."she trembled as she hung on his arm, and looked down, her cheeks pale, as she continued: "i do not want you to be deceived in me, and i shall not go there with you, unless you promise, unless you swear--not to do--not to do anything--that is at all improper."she had suddenly become as red as a poppy, and said no more. he did not know what to reply, for he was happy and disappointed at the same time. he should love her less, certainly, if he knew that her conduct was light, but then it would be so charming, so delicious to have a little flirtation.as he did not say anything, she began to speak again in an agitated voice and with tears in her eyes. "if you do not promise to respect me altogether, i shall return home." and so he squeezed her arm tenderly and replied: "i promise, you shall only do what you like." she appeared relieved in mind, and asked, with a smile: "do you really mean it?" and he looked into her eyes and replied: "i swear it" "now you may take the tickets," she said.during the journey they could hardly speak, as the carriage was full, and when they reached maisons-laffite they went toward the seine. the sun, which shone full on the river, on the leaves and the grass, seemed to be reflected in their hearts, and they went, hand in hand, along the bank, looking at the shoals of little fish swimming near the bank, and they walked on, brimming over with happiness, as if they were walking on air.at last she said: "how foolish you must think me!""why?" he asked. "to come out like this, all alone with you.""certainly not; it is quite natural." "no, no; it is not natural for me --because i do not wish to commit a fault, and yet this is how girls fall. but if you only knew how wretched it is, every day the same thing, every day in the month and every month in the year. i live quite alone with mamma, and as she has had a great deal of trouble, she is not very cheerful. i do the best i can, and try to laugh in spite of everything, but i do not always succeed. but, all the same, it was wrong in me to come, though you, at any rate, will not be sorry."by way of an answer, he kissed her ardently on the ear that was nearest him, but she moved from him with an abrupt movement, and, getting suddenly angry, exclaimed: "oh! monsieur francois, after what you swore to me!" and they went back to maisons-laffitte.they had lunch at the petit-havre, a low house, buried under four enormous poplar trees, by the side of the river. the air, the heat, the weak white wine and the sensation of being so close together made them silent; their faces were flushed and they had a feeling of oppression; but, after the coffee, they regained their high spirits, and, having crossed the seine, started off along the bank, toward the village of la frette. suddenly he asked: "what-is your name?""louise.""louise," he repeated and said nothing more.the girl picked daisies and made them into a great bunch, while he sang vigorously, as unrestrained as a colt that has been turned into a meadow. on their left a vine-covered slope followed the river. francois stopped motionless with astonishment: "oh, look there!" he said.the vines had come to an end, and the whole slope was covered with lilac bushes in flower. it was a purple wood! a kind of great carpet of flowers stretched over the earth, reaching as far as the village, more than two miles off. she also stood, surprised and delighted, and murmured: "oh! how pretty!" and, crossing a meadow, they ran toward that curious low hill, which, every year, furnishes all the lilac that is drawn through paris on the carts of the flower venders.there was a narrow path beneath the trees, so they took it, and when they came to a small clearing, sat down.swarms of flies were buzzing around them and making a continuous, gentle sound, and the sun, the bright sun of a perfectly still day, shone over the bright slopes and from that forest of blossoms a powerful fragrance was borne toward them, a breath of perfume, the breath of the flowers.a church clock struck in the distance, and they embraced gently, then, without the knowledge of anything but that kiss, lay down on the grass. but she soon came to herself with the feeling of a great misfortune, and began to cry and sob with grief, with her face buried in her hands.he tried to console her, but she wanted to start to return and to go home immediately; and she kept saying, as she walked along quickly: "good heavens! good heavens!"he said to her: "louise! louise! please let us stop here." but now her cheeks were red and her eyes hollow, and, as soon as they got to the railway station in paris, she left him without even saying good-by.iiiwhen he met her in the omnibus, next day, she appeared to him to be changed and thinner, and she said to him: "i want to speak to you; we will get down at the boulevard."as soon as they were on the pavement, she said:"we must bid each other good-by; i cannot meet you again." "but why?" he asked. "because i cannot; i have been culpable, and i will not be so again."then he implored her, tortured by his love, but she replied firmly: "no, i cannot, i cannot." he, however, only grew all the more excited and promised to marry her, but she said again: "no," and left him.for a week he did not see her. he could not manage to meet her, and, as he did not know her address, he thought that he had lost her altogether. on the ninth day, however, there was a ring at his bell, and when he opened the door, she was there. she threw herself into his arms and did not resist any longer, and for three months they were close friends. he was beginning to grow tired of her, when she whispered something to him, and then he had one idea and wish: to break with her at any price. as, however, he could not do that, not knowing how to begin, or what to say, full of anxiety through fear of the consequences of his rash indiscretion, he took a decisive step: one night he changed his lodgings and disappeared.the blow was so heavy that she did not look, for the man who had abandoned her, but threw herself at her mother's knees and confessed her misfortune, and, some months after, gave birth to a boy.ivyears passed, and francois tessier grew old, without there having been any alteration in his life. he led the dull, monotonous life of an office clerk, without hope and without expectation. every day he got up at the same time, went through the same streets, went through the same door, past the same porter, went into the same office, sat in the same chair, and did the same work. he was alone in the world, alone during the day in the midst of his different colleagues, and alone at night in his bachelor's lodgings, and he laid by a hundred francs a month against old age.every sunday he went to the champs-elysees, to watch the elegant people, the carriages and the pretty women, and the next day he used to say to one of his colleagues: "the return of the carriages from the bois du boulogne was very brilliant yesterday." one fine sunday morning, however, he went into the parc monceau, where the mothers and nurses, sitting on the sides of the walks, watched the children playing, and suddenly francois tessier started. a woman passed by, holding two children by the hand, a little boy of about ten and a little girl of four. it was she!he walked another hundred yards anti then fell into a chair, choking with emotion. she had not recognized him, and so he came back, wishing to see her again. she was sitting down now, and the boy was standing by her side very quietly, while the little girl was making sand castles. it was she, it was certainly she, but she had the reserved appearance of a lady, was dressed simply, and looked self-possessed and dignified. he looked at her from a distance, for he did not venture to go near; but the little boy raised his head, and francois tessier felt himself tremble. it was his own son, there could be no doubt of that. and, as he looked at him, he thought he could recognize himself as he appeared in an old photograph taken years ago. he remained hidden behind a tree, waiting for her to go that he might follow her.he did not sleep that night. the idea of the child especially tormented him. his son! oh, if he could only have known, have been sure! but what could he have done? however, he went to the house where she lived and asked about her. he was told that a neighbor, an honorable man of strict morals, had been touched by her distress and had married her; he knew the fault she had committed and had married her, and had even recognized the child, his, francois tessier's child, as his own.he returned to the parc monceau every sunday, for then he always saw her, and each time he was seized with a mad, an irresistible longing to take his son into his arms, to cover him with kisses and to steal him, to carry him off.he suffered horribly in his wretched isolation as an old bachelor, with nobody to care for him, and he also suffered atrocious mental torture, torn by paternal tenderness springing from remorse, longing and jealousy and from that need of loving one's own children which nature has implanted in all. at last he determined to make a despairing attempt, and, going up to her, as she entered the park, he said, standing in the middle of the path, pale and with trembling lips: "you do not recognize me." she raised her eyes, looked at him, uttered an exclamation of horror, of terror, and, taking the two children by the hand, she rushed away, dragging them after her, while he went home and wept inconsolably.months passed without his seeing her again, but he suffered, day and night, for he was a prey to his paternal love. he would gladly have died, if he could only have kissed his son; he would have committed murder, performed any task, braved any danger, ventured anything. he wrote to her, but she did not reply, and, after writing her some twenty letters, he saw that there was no hope of altering her determination, and then he formed the desperate resolution of writing to her husband, being quite prepared to receive a bullet from a revolver, if need be. his letter only consisted of a few lines, as follows:"monsieur: you must have a perfect horror of my name, but i am so wretched, so overcome by misery that my only hope is in you, and, therefore, i venture to request you to grant me an interview of only five minutes."i have the honor, etc."the next day he received the reply:"monsieur: i shall expect you to-morrow, tuesday, at five o'clock."as he went up the staircase, francois tessier's heart beat so violently that he had to stop several times. there was a dull and violent thumping noise in his breast, as of some animal galloping; and he could breathe only with difficulty, and had to hold on to the banisters, in order not to fall.he rang the bell on the third floor, and when a maid servant had opened the door, he asked: "does monsieur flamel live here?" "yes, monsieur. kindly come in."he was shown into the drawing-room; he was alone, and waited, feeling bewildered, as in the midst of a catastrophe, until a door opened, and a man came in. he was tall, serious and rather stout, and wore a black frock coat, and pointed to a chair with his hand. francois tessier sat down, and then said, with choking breath: "monsieur--monsieur--i do not know whether you know my name--whether you know----"monsieur flamel interrupted him. "you need not tell it me, monsieur, i know it. my wife has spoken to me about you." he spoke in the dignified tone of voice of a good man who wishes to be severe, and with the commonplace stateliness of an honorable man, and francois tessier continued:"well, monsieur, i want to say this: i am dying of grief, of remorse, of shame, and i would like once, only once to kiss the child."monsieur flamel got up and rang the bell, and when the servant came in, he said: "will you bring louis here?" when she had gone out, they remained face to face, without speaking, as they had nothing more to say to one another, and waited. then, suddenly, a little boy of ten rushed into the room and ran up to the man whom he believed to be his father, but he stopped when he saw the stranger, and monsieur flamel kissed him and said: "now, go and kiss that gentleman, my dear." and the child went up to the stranger and looked at him.francois tessier had risen. he let his hat fall, and was ready to fall himself as he looked at his son, while monsieur flamel had turned away, from a feeling of delicacy, and was looking out of the window.the child waited in surprise; but he picked up the hat and gave it to the stranger. then francois, taking the child up in his arms, began to kiss him wildly all over his face; on his eyes, his cheeks, his mouth, his hair; and the youngster, frightened at the shower of kisses, tried to avoid them, turned away his head, and pushed away the man's face with his little hands. but suddenly francois tessier put him down and cried: "good-by! good-by!" and he rushed out of the room as if he had been a thief."what became of leremy?""he is captain in the sixth dragoons.""and pinson?""he's a subprefect.""and racollet?""dead."we were searching for other names which would remind us of the youthful faces of our younger days. once in a while we had met some of these old comrades, bearded, bald, married, fathers of several children, and the realization of these changes had given us an unpleasant shudder, reminding us how short life is, how everything passes away, how everything changes. my friend asked me:"and patience, fat patience?"i almost, howled:"oh! as for him, just listen to this. four or five years ago i was in limoges, on a tour of inspection, and i was waiting for dinner time. i was seated before the big cafe in the place du theatre, just bored to death. the tradespeople were coming by twos, threes or fours, to take their absinthe or vermouth, talking all the time of their own or other people's business, laughing loudly, or lowering their voices in order to impart some important or delicate piece of news."i was saying to myself: 'what shall i do after dinner?' and i thought of the long evening in this provincial town, of the slow, dreary walk through unknown streets, of the impression of deadly gloom which these provincial people produce on the lonely traveller, and of the whole oppressive atmosphere of the place."i was thinking of all these things as i watched the little jets of gas flare up, feeling my loneliness increase with the falling shadows."a big, fat man sat down at the next table and called in a stentorian voice:"'waiter, my bitters!'"the 'my' came out like the report of a cannon. i immediately understood that everything was his in life, and not another's; that he had his nature, by jove, his appetite, his trousers, his everything, his, more absolutely and more completely than anyone else's. then he looked round him with a satisfied air. his bitters were brought, and he ordered:"'my newspaper!'"i wondered: 'which newspaper can his be?' the title would certainly reveal to me his opinions, his theories, his principles, his hobbies, his weaknesses."the waiter brought the temps. i was surprised. why the temps, a serious, sombre, doctrinaire, impartial sheet? i thought:"'he must be a serious man with settled and regular habits; in short, a good bourgeois.'"he put on his gold-rimmed spectacles, leaned back before beginning to read, and once more glanced about him. he noticed me, and immediately began to stare at me in an annoying manner. i was even going to ask the reason for this attention, when he exclaimed from his seat:"'well, by all that's holy, if this isn't gontran lardois.'"i answered:"'yes, monsieur, you are not mistaken.'"then he quickly rose and came toward me with hands outstretched:"'well, old man, how are you?'"as i did not recognize him at all i was greatly embarrassed. i stammered:"'why-very well-and-you?'"he began to laugh "'i bet you don't recognize me.'"'no, not exactly. it seems--however--'"he slapped me on the back:"'come on, no joking! i am patience, robert patience, your friend, your chum.'"i recognized him. yes, robert patience, my old college chum. it was he. i took his outstretched hand:"'and how are you?'"'fine!'"his smile was like a paean of victory."he asked:"'what are you doing here?'"i explained that i was government inspector of taxes."he continued, pointing to my red ribbon:"'then you have-been a success?'"i answered:"'fairly so. and you?'"'i am doing well!'"'what are you doing?'"'i'm in business.'"'making money?'"'heaps. i'm very rich. but come around to lunch, to-morrow noon, 17 rue du coq-qui-chante; you will see my place.'"he seemed to hesitate a second, then continued:"'are you still the good sport that you used to be?'"'i--i hope so.'"'not married?'"'no.'"'good. and do you still love a good time and potatoes?'"i was beginning to find him hopelessly vulgar. nevertheless, i answered "'yes.'"'and pretty girls?'"'most assuredly.'"he began to laugh good-humoredly."'good, good! do you remember our first escapade, in bordeaux, after that dinner at routie's? what a spree!'"i did, indeed, remember that spree; and the recollection of it cheered me up. this called to mind other pranks. he would say:"'say, do you remember the time when we locked the proctor up in old man latoque's cellar?'"and he laughed and banged the table with his fist, and then he continued:"'yes-yes-yes-and do you remember the face of the geography teacher, m. marin, the day we set off a firecracker in the globe, just as he was haranguing about the principal volcanoes of the earth?'"then suddenly i asked him:"'and you, are you married?'"he exclaimed:"'ten years, my boy, and i have four children, remarkable youngsters; but you'll see them and their mother.'"we were talking rather loud; the people around us looked at us in surprise."suddenly my friend looked at his watch, a chronometer the size of a pumpkin, and he cried:"'thunder! i'm sorry, but i'll have to leave you; i am never free at night.'"he rose, took both my hands, shook them as though he were trying to wrench my arms from their sockets, and exclaimed:"'so long, then; till to-morrow noon!'"'so long!'"i spent the morning working in the office of the collector-general of the department. the chief wished me to stay to luncheon, but i told him that i had an engagement with a friend. as he had to go out, he accompanied me."i asked him:"'can you tell me how i can find the rue du coq-qui-chante?'"he answered:"'yes, it's only five minutes' walk from here. as i have nothing special to do, i will take you there.'"we started out and soon found ourselves there. it was a wide, fine- looking street, on the outskirts of the town. i looked at the houses and i noticed no. 17. it was a large house with a garden behind it. the facade, decorated with frescoes, in the italian style, appeared to me as being in bad taste. there were goddesses holding vases, others swathed in clouds. two stone cupids supported the number of the house."i said to the treasurer:"'here is where i am going.'"i held my hand out to him. he made a quick, strange gesture, said nothing and shook my hand."i rang. a maid appeared. i asked:"'monsieur patience, if you please?'"she answered:"'right here, sir. is it to monsieur that you wish to speak?'"'yes.'"the hall was decorated with paintings from the brush of some local artist. pauls and virginias were kissing each other under palm trees bathed in a pink light. a hideous oriental lantern was ranging from the ceiling. several doors were concealed by bright hangings."but what struck me especially was the odor. it was a sickening and perfumed odor, reminding one of rice powder and the mouldy smell of a cellar. an indefinable odor in a heavy atmosphere as oppressive as that of public baths. i followed the maid up a marble stairway, covered with a green, oriental carpet, and was ushered into a sumptubus parlor."left alone, i looked about me."the room was richly furnished, but in the pretentious taste of a parvenu. rather fine engravings of the last century represented women with powdered hair dressed high surprised by gentlemen in interesting positions. another lady, lying in a large bed, was teasing with her foot a little dog, lost in the sheets. one drawing showed four feet, bodies concealed behind a curtain. the large room, surrounded by soft couches, was entirely impregnated with that enervating and insipid odor which i had already noticed. there seemed to be something suspicious about the walls, the hangings, the exaggerated luxury, everything."i approached the window to look into the garden. it was very big, shady, beautiful. a wide path wound round a grass plot in the midst of which was a fountain, entered a shrubbery and came out farther away. and, suddenly, yonder, in the distance, between two clumps of bushes, three women appeared. they were walking slowly, arm in arm, clad in long, white tea-gowns covered with lace. two were blondes and the other was dark-haired. almost immediately they disappeared again behind the trees. i stood there entranced, delighted with this short and charming apparition, which brought to my mind a whole world of poetry. they had scarcely allowed themselves to be seen, in just the proper light, in that frame of foliage, in the midst of that mysterious, delightful park. it seemed to me that i had suddenly seen before me the great ladies of the last century, who were depicted in the engravings on the wall. and i began to think of the happy, joyous, witty and amorous times when manners were so graceful and lips so approachable."a deep voice male me jump. patience had come in, beaming, and held out his hands to me."he looked into my eyes with the sly look which one takes when divulging secrets of love, and, with a napoleonic gesture, he showed me his sumptuous parlor, his park, the three women, who had reappeared in the back of it, then, in a triumphant voice, where the note of pride was prominent, he said:"'and to think that i began with nothing--my wife and my sister-in-law!'"i will not record the name either of the country or of the man concerned. it was far, very far from this part of the world, on a fertile and scorching sea-coast. all morning we had been following a coast clothed with crops and a blue sea clothed in sunlight. flowers thrust up their heads quite close to the waves, rippling waves, so gentle, drowsing. it was hot--a relaxing heat, redolent of the rich soil, damp and fruitful: one almost heard the rising of the sap.i had been told that, in the evening, i could obtain hospitality in the house of a frenchman, who lived at the end of a headland, in an orange grove. who was he? i did not yet know. he had arrived one morning, ten years ago; he had bought a piece of ground, planted vines, sown seed; he had worked, this man, passionately, furiously. l hen, month by month, year by year, increasing his demesne, continually fertilising the lusty and virgin soil, he had in this way amassed a fortune by his unsparing labour.yet he went on working, all the time, people said. up at dawn, going over his fields until night, always on the watch, he seemed to be goaded by a fixed idea, tortured by an insatiable lust for money, which nothing lulls to sleep, and nothing can appease.now he seemed to be very rich.the sun was just setting when i reached his dwelling. this was, indeed, built at the end of an out-thrust cliff, in the midst of orange-trees. it was a large plain-looking house, built four-square, and overlooking the sea.as i approached, a man with a big beard appeared in the door way. greeting him, i asked him to give me shelter for the night. he held out his hand to me, smiling."come in, sir, and make yourself at home."he led the way to a room, put a servant at my disposal, with the perfect assurance and easy good manners of a man of the world; then he left me, saying:"we will dine as soon as you are quite ready to come down."we did indeed dine alone, on a terrace facing the sea. at the beginning of the meal, i spoke to him of this country, so rich, so far from the world, so little known. he smiled, answering indifferently."yes, it is a beautiful country. but no country is attractive that lies so far from the country of one's heart.""you regret france?""i regret paris.""why not go back to it?""oh, i shall go back to it."then, quite naturally, we began to talk of french society, of the boulevards, and people, and things of paris. he questioned me after the manner of a man who knew all about it, mentioning names, all the names familiar on the vaudeville promenade."who goes to tortoni's now?""all the same people, except those who have died."i looked at him closely, haunted by a vague memory. assuredly i had seen this face somewhere. but where? but when? he seemed weary though active, melancholy though determined. his big fair beard fell to his chest, and now and then he took hold of it below the chin and, holding it in his closed hand, let the whole length of it run through his fingers. a little bald, he had heavy eyebrows and a thick moustache that merged into the hair covering his cheeks. behind us the sun sank in the sea, flinging over the coast a fiery haze. the orange-trees in full blossom filled the air with their sweet, heady scent. he had eyes for nothing but me, and with his intent gaze he seemed to peer through my eyes, to see in the depths of my thoughts the far-off, familiar, and well-loved vision of the wide, shady pavement that runs from the madeleine to the rue drouot."do you know boutrelle?""yes, well.""is he much changed?""yes, he has gone quite white.""and la ridamie?""always the same.""and the women? tell me about the woman. let me see, do you know suzanne verner?""yes, very stout. done for.""ah! and sophie astier?""dead.""poor girl! and is . . . do you know. . . ."but he was abruptly silent. then in a changed voice, his face grown suddenly pale, he went on:"no, it would be better for me not to speak of it any more, it tortures me."then, as if to change the trend of his thoughts, he rose."shall we go in?""i am quite ready."and he preceded me into the house.the rooms on the ground floor were enormous, bare, gloomy, apparently deserted. napkins and glasses were scattered about the tables, left there by the swan-skinned servants who prowled about this vast dwelling all the time. two guns were hanging from two nails on the wall, and in the corners i saw spades, fishing-lines, dried palm leaves, objects of all kinds, deposited there by people who happened to come into the house, and remaining there within easy reach until someone happened to go out or until they were wanted for a job of work.my host smiled."it is the dwelling, or rather the hovel; of an exile," said he, "but my room is rather more decent. let's go there."my first thought, when i entered the room, was that i was penetrating into a second-hand dealer's, so full of things was it, all the incongruous, strange, and varied things that one feels must be mementoes. on the walls two excellent pictures by well-known artists, hangings, weapons, swords and pistols, and then, right in the middle of the most prominent panel, a square of white satin in a gold frame.surprised, i went closer to look at it and i saw a hairpin stuck in the centre of the gleaming material.my host laid his hand on my shoulder."there," he said, with a smile, "is the only thing i ever look at in this place, and the only one i have seen for ten years. monsieur prudhomme declared: 'this sabre is the finest day of my life!' as for me, i can say: 'this pin is the whole of my life!'"i sought for the conventional phrase; i ended by saying:"some woman has made you suffer?"he went on harshly:"i suffer yet, and frightfully. . . . but come on to my balcony. a name came to my lips just now, that i dared not utter, because if you had answered 'dead,' as you did for sophie astier, i should have blown out my brains, this very day."we had gone out on to a wide balcony looking towards two deep valleys, one on the right and the other on the left, shut in by high sombre mountains. it was that twilight hour when the vanished sun lights the earth only by its reflection in the sky.he continued:"is jeanne de limours still alive?"his eye was fixed on mine, full of shuddering terror.i smiled."very much alive . . . and prettier than ever.""you know her?""yes."he hesitated:"intimately?""no."he took my hand:"talk to me about her.""but there is nothing i can say: she is one of the women, or rather one of the most charming and expensive gay ladies in paris. she leads a pleasant and sumptuous life, and that's all one can say."he murmured: "i love her," as if he had said: "i am dying." then abruptly:"ah, for three years, what a distracting and glorious life we lived! five or six times i all but killed her; she tried to pierce my eyes with that pin at which you have been looking. there, look at this little white speck on my left eye. we loved each other! how can i explain such a passion? you would not understand it."there must be a gentle love, born of the swift mutual union of two hearts and two souls; but assuredly there exists a savage love, cruelly tormenting, born of the imperious force which binds together two discordant beings who adore while they hate."that girl ruined me in three years. i had four millions which she devoured quite placidly, in her indifferent fashion, crunching them up with a sweet smile that seemed to die from her eyes on to her lips."you know her? there is something irresistible about her. what is it? i don't know. is it those grey eyes whose glance thrusts like a gimlet and remains in you like the barb of an arrow? it is rather that sweet smile, indifferent and infinitely charming, that dwells on her face like a mask. little by little her slow grace invades one, rises from her like a perfume, from her tall, slender body, which sways a little as she moves, for she seems to glide rather than walk, from her lovely, drawling voice that seems the music of her smile, from the very motion of her body, too, a motion that is always restrained, always just right, taking the eye with rapture, so exquisitely proportioned it is. for three years i was conscious of no one but her. how i suffered! for she deceived me with every one. why? for no reason, for the mere sake of deceiving. and when i discovered it, when i abused her as a light-o'-love and a loose woman, she admitted it calmly. 'we're not married, are we?' she said."since i have been here, i have thought of her so much that i have ended by understanding her: that woman is manon lescaut come again. manon could not love without betraying for manon, love, pleasure, and money were all one."he was silent. then, some minutes later:"when i had squandered my last sou for her, she said to me quite simply: 'you realise, my dear, that i cannot live on air and sunshine. i love you madly, i love you more than anyone in the world, but one must live. poverty and i would never make good bedfellows.'"and if i did but tell you what an agonising life i had lead with her! when i looked at her, i wanted to kill her as sharply as i wanted to embrace her. when i looked at her . . . i felt a mad impulse to open my arms, to take her to me and strangle her. there lurked in her, behind her eyes, something treacherous and for ever unattainable that made me execrate her; and it is perhaps because of that that i loved her so. in her, the feminine, the detestable and distracting feminine, was more puissant than in any other woman. she was charged with it, surcharged as with an intoxicating and venomous fluid. she was woman, more essentially than any one woman has ever been."and look you, when i went out with her, she fixed her glance on every man, in such a way that she seemed to be giving each one of them her undivided interest. that maddened me and yet held me to her the closer. this woman, in the mere act of walking down the street, was owned by every man in it, in spite of me, in spite of herself, by virtue of her very nature, although she bore herself with a quiet and modest air. do you understand?"and what torture! at the theatre, in the restaurant, it seemed to me that men possessed her under my very eyes. and as soon as i left her company, other men did indeed possess her."it is ten years since i have seen her, and i love her more then ever."night had spread its wings upon the earth. the powerful scent of orange-trees hung in the air.i said to him:"you will see her again?"he answered:"by god, yes. i have here, in land and money, from seven to eight hundred thousand francs. when the million is complete, i shall sell all and depart. i shall have enough for one year with her--one entire marvellous year. and then goodbye, my life will be over."i asked:"but afterwards?""afterwards, i don't know. it will be the end. perhaps i shall ask her to keep me on as her body-servant."all were crowding around m. bermutier, the judge, who was giving his opinion about the saint-cloud mystery. for a month this in explicable crime had been the talk of paris. nobody could make head or tail of it.m. bermutier, standing with his back to the fireplace, was talking, citing the evidence, discussing the various theories, but arriving at no conclusion.some women had risen, in order to get nearer to him, and were standing with their eyes fastened on the clean-shaven face of the judge, who was saying such weighty things. they, were shaking and trembling, moved by fear and curiosity, and by the eager and insatiable desire for the horrible, which haunts the soul of every woman. one of them, paler than the others, said during a pause:"it's terrible. it verges on the supernatural. the truth will never be known."the judge turned to her:"true, madame, it is likely that the actual facts will never be discovered. as for the word 'supernatural' which you have just used, it has nothing to do with the matter. we are in the presence of a very cleverly conceived and executed crime, so well enshrouded in mystery that we cannot disentangle it from the involved circumstances which surround it. but once i had to take charge of an affair in which the uncanny seemed to play a part. in fact, the case became so confused that it had to be given up."several women exclaimed at once:"oh! tell us about it!"m. bermutier smiled in a dignified manner, as a judge should, and went on:"do not think, however, that i, for one minute, ascribed anything in the case to supernatural influences. i believe only in normal causes. but if, instead of using the word 'supernatural' to express what we do not understand, we were simply to make use of the word 'inexplicable,' it would be much better. at any rate, in the affair of which i am about to tell you, it is especially the surrounding, preliminary circumstances which impressed me. here are the facts:"i was, at that time, a judge at ajaccio, a little white city on the edge of a bay which is surrounded by high mountains."the majority of the cases which came up before me concerned vendettas. there are some that are superb, dramatic, ferocious, heroic. we find there the most beautiful causes for revenge of which one could dream, enmities hundreds of years old, quieted for a time but never extinguished; abominable stratagems, murders becoming massacres and almost deeds of glory. for two years i heard of nothing but the price of blood, of this terrible corsican prejudice which compels revenge for insults meted out to the offending person and all his descendants and relatives. i had seen old men, children, cousins murdered; my head was full of these stories."one day i learned that an englishman had just hired a little villa at the end of the bay for several years. he had brought with him a french servant, whom he had engaged on the way at marseilles."soon this peculiar person, living alone, only going out to hunt and fish, aroused a widespread interest. he never spoke to any one, never went to the town, and every morning he would practice for an hour or so with his revolver and rifle."legends were built up around him. it was said that he was some high personage, fleeing from his fatherland for political reasons; then it was affirmed that he was in hiding after having committed some abominable crime. some particularly horrible circumstances were even mentioned."in my judicial position i thought it necessary to get some information about this man, but it was impossible to learn anything. he called himself sir john rowell."i therefore had to be satisfied with watching him as closely as i could, but i could see nothing suspicious about his actions."however, as rumors about him were growing and becoming more widespread, i decided to try to see this stranger myself, and i began to hunt regularly in the neighborhood of his grounds."for a long time i watched without finding an opportunity. at last it came to me in the shape of a partridge which i shot and killed right in front of the englishman. my dog fetched it for me, but, taking the bird, i went at once to sir john rowell and, begging his pardon, asked him to accept it."he was a big man, with red hair and beard, very tall, very broad, a kind of calm and polite hercules. he had nothing of the so-called british stiffness, and in a broad english accent he thanked me warmly for my attention. at the end of a month we had had five or six conversations."one night, at last, as i was passing before his door, i saw him in the garden, seated astride a chair, smoking his pipe. i bowed and he invited me to come in and have a glass of beer. i needed no urging."he received me with the most punctilious english courtesy, sang the praises of france and of corsica, and declared that he was quite in love with this country."then, with great caution and under the guise of a vivid interest, i asked him a few questions about his life and his plans. he answered without embarrassment, telling me that he had travelled a great deal in africa, in the indies, in america. he added, laughing:"'i have had many adventures.'"then i turned the conversation on hunting, and he gave me the most curious details on hunting the hippopotamus, the tiger, the elephant and even the gorilla."i said:"'are all these animals dangerous?'"he smiled:"'oh, no! man is the worst.'"and he laughed a good broad laugh, the wholesome laugh of a contented englishman."'i have also frequently been man-hunting.'"then he began to talk about weapons, and he invited me to come in and see different makes of guns."his parlor was draped in black, black silk embroidered in gold. big yellow flowers, as brilliant as fire, were worked on the dark material."he said:"'it is a japanese material.'"but in the middle of the widest panel a strange thing attracted my attention. a black object stood out against a square of red velvet. i went up to it; it was a hand, a human hand. not the clean white hand of a skeleton, but a dried black hand, with yellow nails, the muscles exposed and traces of old blood on the bones, which were cut off as clean as though it had been chopped off with an axe, near the middle of the forearm."around the wrist, an enormous iron chain, riveted and soldered to this unclean member, fastened it to the wall by a ring, strong enough to hold an elephant in leash."i asked:"'what is that?'"the englishman answered quietly:"'that is my best enemy. it comes from america, too. the bones were severed by a sword and the skin cut off with a sharp stone and dried in the sun for a week.'"i touched these human remains, which must have belonged to a giant. the uncommonly long fingers were attached by enormous tendons which still had pieces of skin hanging to them in places. this hand was terrible to see; it made one think of some savage vengeance."i said:"'this man must have been very strong.'"the englishman answered quietly:"'yes, but i was stronger than he. i put on this chain to hold him.'"i thought that he was joking. i said:"'this chain is useless now, the hand won't run away.'"sir john rowell answered seriously:"'it always wants to go away. this chain is needed.'"i glanced at him quickly, questioning his face, and i asked myself:"'is he an insane man or a practical joker?'"but his face remained inscrutable, calm and friendly. i turned to other subjects, and admired his rifles."however, i noticed that he kept three loaded revolvers in the room, as though constantly in fear of some attack."i paid him several calls. then i did not go any more. people had become used to his presence; everybody had lost interest in him."a whole year rolled by. one morning, toward the end of november, my servant awoke me and announced that sir john rowell had been murdered during the night."half an hour later i entered the englishman's house, together with the police commissioner and the captain of the gendarmes. the servant, bewildered and in despair, was crying before the door. at first i suspected this man, but he was innocent."the guilty party could never be found."on entering sir john's parlor, i noticed the body, stretched out on its back, in the middle of the room."his vest was torn, the sleeve of his jacket had been pulled off, everything pointed to, a violent struggle."the englishman had been strangled! his face was black, swollen and frightful, and seemed to express a terrible fear. he held something between his teeth, and his neck, pierced by five or six holes which looked as though they had been made by some iron instrument, was covered with blood."a physician joined us. he examined the finger marks on the neck for a long time and then made this strange announcement:"'it looks as though he had been strangled by a skeleton.'"a cold chill seemed to run down my back, and i looked over to where i had formerly seen the terrible hand. it was no longer there. the chain was hanging down, broken."i bent over the dead man and, in his contracted mouth, i found one of the fingers of this vanished hand, cut--or rather sawed off by the teeth down to the second knuckle."then the investigation began. nothing could be discovered. no door, window or piece of furniture had been forced. the two watch dogs had not been aroused from their sleep."here, in a few words, is the testimony of the servant:"for a month his master had seemed excited. he had received many letters, which he would immediately burn."often, in a fit of passion which approached madness, he had taken a switch and struck wildly at this dried hand riveted to the wall, and which had disappeared, no one knows how, at the very hour of the crime."he would go to bed very late and carefully lock himself in. he always kept weapons within reach. often at night he would talk loudly, as though he were quarrelling with some one."that night, somehow, he had made no noise, and it was only on going to open the windows that the servant had found sir john murdered. he suspected no one."i communicated what i knew of the dead man to the judges and public officials. throughout the whole island a minute investigation was carried on. nothing could be found out."one night, about three months after the crime, i had a terrible nightmare. i seemed to see the horrible hand running over my curtains and walls like an immense scorpion or spider. three times i awoke, three times i went to sleep again; three times i saw the hideous object galloping round my room and moving its fingers like legs."the following day the hand was brought me, found in the cemetery, on the grave of sir john rowell, who had been buried there because we had been unable to find his family. the first finger was missing."ladies, there is my story. i know nothing more."the women, deeply stirred, were pale and trembling. one of them exclaimed:"but that is neither a climax nor an explanation! we will be unable to sleep unless you give us your opinion of what had occurred."the judge smiled severely:"oh! ladies, i shall certainly spoil your terrible dreams. i simply believe that the legitimate owner of the hand was not dead, that he came to get it with his remaining one. but i don't know how. it was a kind of vendetta."one of the women murmured:"no, it can't be that."and the judge, still smiling, said:"didn't i tell you that my explanation would not satisfy you?"meetings that are unexpected constitute the charm of traveling. who has not experienced the joy of suddenly coming across a parisian, a college friend, or a neighbor, five hundred miles from home? who has not passed a night awake in one of those small, rattling country stagecoaches, in regions where steam is still a thing unknown, beside a strange young woman, of whom one has caught only a glimpse in the dim light of the lantern, as she entered the carriage in front of a white house in some small country town?and the next morning, when one's head and ears feel numb with the continuous tinkling of the bells and the loud rattling of the windows, what a charming sensation it is to see your pretty neighbor open her eyes, startled, glance around her, arrange her rebellious hair with her slender fingers, adjust her hat, feel with sure hand whether her corset is still in place, her waist straight, and her skirt not too wrinkled.she glances at you coldly and curiously. then she leans back and no longer seems interested in anything but the country.in spite of yourself, you watch her; and in spite of yourself you keep on thinking of her. who is she? whence does she come? where is she going? in spite of yourself you spin a little romance around her. she is pretty; she seems charming! happy he who . . . life might be delightful with her. who knows? she is perhaps the woman of our dreams, the one suited to our disposition, the one for whom our heart calls.and how delicious even the disappointment at seeing her get out at the gate of a country house! a man stands there, who is awaiting her, with two children and two maids. he takes her in his arms and kisses as he lifts her out. then she stoops over the little ones, who hold up their hands to her; she kisses them tenderly; and then they all go away together, down a path, while the maids catch the packages which the driver throws down to them from the coach.adieu! it is all over. you never will see her again! adieu to the young woman who has passed the night by your side. you know her no more, you have not spoken to her; all the same, you feel a little sad to see her go. adieu!i have had many of these souvenirs of travel, some joyous and some sad.once i was in auvergne, tramping through those delightful french mountains, that are not too high, not too steep, but friendly and familiar. i had climbed the sancy, and entered a little inn, near a pilgrim's chapel called notre-dame de vassiviere, when i saw a queer, ridiculous-looking old woman breakfasting alone at the end table.she was at least seventy years old, tall, skinny, and angular, and her white hair was puffed around her temples in the old-fashioned style. she was dressed like a traveling englishwoman, in awkward, queer clothing, like a person who is indifferent to dress. she was eating an omelet and drinking water.her face was peculiar, with restless eyes and the expression of one with whom fate has dealt unkindly. i watched her, in spite of myself, thinking: "who is she? what is the life of this woman? why is she wandering alone through these mountains?"she paid and rose to leave, drawing up over her shoulders an astonishing little shawl, the two ends of which hung over her arms. from a corner of the room she took an alpenstock, which was covered with names traced with a hot iron; then she went out, straight, erect, with the long steps of a letter-carrier who is setting out on his route.a guide was waiting for her at the door, and both went away. i watched them go down the valley, along the road marked by a line of high wooden crosses. she was taller than her companion, and seemed to walk faster than he.two hours later i was climbing the edge of the deep funnel that incloses lake pavin in a marvelous and enormous basin of verdure, full of trees, bushes, rocks, and flowers. this lake is so round that it seems as if the outline had been drawn with a pair of compasses, so clear and blue that one might deem it a flood of azure come down from the sky, so charming that one would like to live in a but on the wooded slope which dominates this crater, where the cold, still water is sleeping. the englishwoman was standing there like a statue, gazing upon the transparent sheet down in the dead volcano. she was straining her eyes to penetrate below the surface down to the unknown depths, where monstrous trout which have devoured all the other fish are said to live. as i was passing close by her, it seemed to me that two big tears were brimming her eyes. but she departed at a great pace, to rejoin her guide, who had stayed behind in an inn at the foot of the path leading to the lake.i did not see her again that day.the next day, at nightfall, i came to the chateau of murol. the old fortress, an enormous tower standing on a peak in the midst of a large valley, where three valleys intersect, rears its brown, uneven, cracked surface into the sky; it is round, from its large circular base to the crumbling turrets on its pinnacles.it astonishes the eye more than any other ruin by its simple mass, its majesty, its grave and imposing air of antiquity. it stands there, alone, high as a mountain, a dead queen, but still the queen of the valleys stretched out beneath it. you go up by a slope planted with firs, then you enter a narrow gate, and stop at the foot of the walls, in the first inclosure, in full view of the entire country.inside there are ruined halls, crumbling stairways, unknown cavities, dungeons, walls cut through in the middle, vaulted roofs held up one knows not how, and a mass of stones and crevices, overgrown with grass, where animals glide in and out.i was exploring this ruin alone.suddenly i perceived behind a bit of wall a being, a kind of phantom, like the spirit of this ancient and crumbling habitation.i was taken aback with surprise, almost with fear, when i recognized the old lady whom i had seen twice.she was weeping, with big tears in her eyes, and held her handkerchief in her hand.i turned around to go away, when she spoke to me, apparently ashamed to have been surprised in her grief."yes, monsieur, i am crying. that does not happen often to me.""pardon me, madame, for having disturbed you," i stammered, confused, not knowing what to say. "some misfortune has doubtless come to you.""yes. no--i am like a lost dog," she murmured, and began to sob, with her handkerchief over her eyes.moved by these contagious tears, i took her hand, trying to calm her. then brusquely she told me her history, as if no longer ably to bear her grief alone."oh! oh! monsieur--if you knew--the sorrow in which i live--in what sorrow."once i was happy. i have a house down there--a home. i cannot go back to it any more; i shall never go back to it again, it is too hard to bear."i have a son. it is he! it is he! children don't know. oh, one has such a short time to live! if i should see him now i should perhaps not recognize him. how i loved him? how i loved him! even before he was born, when i felt him move. and after that! how i have kissed and caressed and cherished him! if you knew how many nights i have passed in watching him sleep, and how many in thinking of him. i was crazy about him. when he was eight years old his father sent him to boarding-school. that was the end. he no longer belonged to me. oh, heavens! he came to see me every sunday. that was all!"he went to college in paris. then he came only four times a year, and every time i was astonished to see how he had changed, to find him taller without having seen him grow. they stole his childhood from me, his confidence, and his love which otherwise would not have gone away from me; they stole my joy in seeing him grow, in seeing him become a little man."i saw him four times a year. think of it! and at every one of his visits his body, his eye, his movements, his voice his laugh, were no longer the same, were no longer mine. all these things change so quickly in a child; and it is so sad if one is not there to see them change; one no longer recognizes him."one year he came with down on his cheek! he! my son! i was dumfounded --would you believe it? i hardly dared to kiss him. was it really he, my little, little curly head of old, my dear; dear child, whom i had held in his diapers or my knee, and who had nursed at my breast with his little greedy lips--was it he, this tall, brown boy, who no longer knew how to kiss me, who seemed to love me as a matter of duty, who called me 'mother' for the sake of politeness, and who kissed me on the forehead, when i felt like crushing him in my arms?"my husband died. then my parents, and then my two sisters. when death enters a house it seems as if he were hurrying to do his utmost, so as not to have to return for a long time after that. he spares only one or two to mourn the others."i remained alone. my tall son was then studying law. i was hoping to live and die near him, and i went to him so that we could live together. but he had fallen into the ways of young men, and he gave me to understand that i was in his way. so i left. i was wrong in doing so, but i suffered too much in feeling myself in his way, i, his mother! and i came back home."i hardly ever saw him again.'he married. what a joy! at last we should be together for good. i should have grandchildren. his wife was an englishwoman, who took a dislike to me. why? perhaps she thought that i loved him too much."again i was obliged to go away. and i was alone. yes, monsieur."then he went to england, to live with them, with his wife's parents. do you understand? they have him--they have my son for themselves. they have stolen him from me. he writes to me once a month. at first he came to see me. but now he no longer comes."it is now four years since i saw him last. his face then was wrinkled and his hair white. was that possible? this man, my son, almost an old man? my little rosy child of old? no doubt i shall never see him again."and so i travel about all the year. i go east and west, as you see, with no companion."i am like a lost dog. adieu, monsieur! don't stay here with me for it hurts me to have told you all this."i went down the hill, and on turning round to glance back, i saw the old woman standing on a broken wall, looking out upon the mountains, the long valley and lake chambon in the distance.and her skirt and the queer little shawl which she wore around her thin shoulders were fluttering like a flag in the wind.the two young women had the appearance of being buried in a bed of flowers. they  were alone in an immense landau filled with bouquets like a giant basket. upon the  seat before them were two small hampers full of nice violets, and upon the bearskin  which covered their knees was a heap of roses, gillyflowers, marguerites, tuberoses  and orange flowers, bound together with silk ribbons, which seemed to crush the two  delicate bodies, only allowing to appear above the spread-out, perfumed bed the shoulders, arms and a little of their bodices, one of which was blue and the other lilac.the coachman's whip bore a sheath of anemones; the horses' heads were decorated with wallflowers; the spokes of the wheels were clothed in mignonette, and in place of lanterns, there were two round, enormous bouquets, which seemed like the two eyes of this strange, rolling, flowery beast.the landau went along antibes street at a brisk trot, preceded, followed and accompanied by a crowd of other garlanded carriages full of women concealed under a billow of violets. for it was the flower festival at cannesthey arrived at the fonciere boulevard where the battle took place. the whole length of the immense avenue, a double line of bedecked equipages was going and coming, like a ribbon without end. they threw flowers from one to the other. flowers passed in the air like balls, hit the fair faces, hovered and fell in the dust where an army of street urchins gathered them.a compact crowd, clamorous but orderly' looked on, standing in rows upon the sidewalks and held in place by policemen on horseback who passed along, pushing back the curious brutally with their feet, in order that the villains might not mingle with the rich.now the people in the carriages recognized each other, called to each other and bombarded one another with roses. a chariot full of pretty young women, clothed in red like devils, attracted and held all eyes. one gentleman who resembled the portraits of henry iv, threw repeatedly, with joyous ardor, a huge bouquet retained by an elastic. at the threat of the blow the women lowered their heads and hid their eyes, but the gracious projectile only described a curve and again returned to its master, who immediately threw it again to a new face.the two young women emptied their arsenal with full hands and received a shower of bouquets; then after an hour of battle, a little wearied at the last, they ordered the coachman to take the road to the juan gulf, which skirts the sea.the sun disappeared behind the esterel, outlining in black upon a background of fire the lacy silhouette of the stretched-out mountain. the calm sea was spread out blue and clear as far as the horizon, where it mingled with the sky and with the squadron anchored in the middle of the gulf, having the appearance of a troop of monstrous beasts, unmovable upon the water, apocalyptic animals, humpbacked and clothed in coats of mail, capped with thin masts like plumes and with eyes that lighted up when night came on.the young women, stretched out under the fur robe, looked upon it languidly. finally one of them said:"how delicious these evenings are! everything seems good. is it not so, margot?"the other replied: "yes, it is good. but there is always something, lacking."what is it? for my part, i am completely happy. i have need of nothing.""yes? you think so, perhaps. but whatever well-being surrounds our bodies, we always desire something more--for the heart."said the other, smiling: "a little love?""yes."they were silent, looking straight before them; then the one called marguerite said: "life does not seem supportable to me without that. i need to be loved, if only by a dog. and we are all so, whatever you may say, simone.""no, no, my dear. i prefer not to be loved at all than to be loved by no one of importance. do you think, for example, that it would be agreeable to me to be loved by--by---"she looked for someone by whom she could possibly be loved, casting her eyes over the neighboring country. her eyes, after having made the tour of the whole horizon, fell upon the two metal buttons shining on the coachman's back, and she continued, laughing, "by my coachman?"mlle marguerite scarcely smiled as she replied:"i can assure you it is very amusing to be loved by a domestic. this has happened to me two or three times. they roll their eyes so queerly that one is dying to laugh. naturally, the more one is loved, the more severe she becomes, since otherwise, one puts herself in the way of being made ridiculous for some very slight cause, if anyone happened to observe it."mlle simone listened, her look fixed straight before her; then she declared:"no, decidedly, the heart of my valet at my feet would not appear to me sufficient. but tell me how you perceived that you were loved.""i perceived it in them as i do in other men; they become so stupid!""but others do not appear so stupid to me when they are in love.""idiots, my dear, incapable of chatting, of answering, of comprehending anything.""and you? what effect did it have on you to be loved by a domestic? were you moved--flattered?""moved? no. flattered? yes, a little. one is always flattered by the love of a man, whoever he may be.""oh, now, margot!""yes, my dear. wait! i will tell you a singular adventure that happened to me. you will see what curious things take place among us in such cases."it was four years ago in the autumn, when i found myself without a maid. i had tried five or six, one after the other, all of them incompetent, and almost despaired of finding one, when i read in the advertisements of a newspaper of a young girl knowing how to sew, embroider and dress hair, who was seeking a place and could furnish the best of references. she could also speak english."i wrote to the address given, and the next day the person in question presented herself. she was rather tall, thin, a little pale, with a very timid air. she had beautiful black eyes, a charming color, and she pleased me at once. i asked for her references; she gave me one written in english, because she had come, she said, from the house of lady ryswell, where she had been for ten years."the certificate attested that the girl was returning to france of her own will and that she had nothing to reproach her for during her long service with her, except a little of the french coquettishness."the modest turn of the english phrase made me smile a little, and i engaged the maid immediately. she came to my house the same day; she called herself rose."at the end of a month i adored her. she was a treasure, a pearl, phenomenon."she could dress my hair with exquisite taste; she could flute the lace of a cap better than the best of the professionals, and she could make frocks. i was amazed at her ability. never had i been so well served."she dressed me rapidly with an astonishing lightness of hand. i never felt her fingers upon my skin, and nothing is more disagreeable to me than contact with a maid's hand. i immediately got into excessively idle habits, so pleasant was it to let her dress me from head to foot, from chemise to gloves--this tall, timid girl, always blushing a little and never speaking. after my bath she would rub me and massage me while i slept a little while on my divan; indeed, i came to look upon her more as a friend in poorer circumstances than a servant."one morning the concierge, with some show of mystery, said he wished to speak to me. i was surprised but let him enter. he was an old soldier, once orderly for my husband."he appeared to hesitate at what he was going to say. finally he said stammeringly: 'madame, the police captain for this district is downstairs.'"i asked: 'what does he want?'"'he wants to search the house.'"certainly the police are necessary, but i do detest them. i never can make it seem a noble profession. and i answered, irritated as well as wounded:"'why search here? for what purpose? there has been no burglary?'he answered:"'he thinks that a criminal is concealed somewhere here.'"i began to be a little afraid and ordered the police captain to be brought that i might have some explanation. he was a man rather well brought up and decorated with the legion of honor. he excused himself, asked my pardon. then asserted that i had among my servants a convict!"i was thunderstruck and answered that i could vouch for every one of them and that i would make a review of them for his satisfaction."'there is peter courtin, an old soldier.'"it was not he."'the coachman, francis pingau, a peasant, son of my father's farmer.'"it was not he."'a stableboy, also from champagne and also a son of peasants i had known, and no more except the footman, whom you have seen.'"it was not any of them."'then, sir, you see that you have been deceived.'"'pardon me, madame, but i am sure i am not deceived. as he has not at all the appearance of a criminal, will you have the goodness to have all your servants appear here before you and me, all of them?'"i hesitated at first, then i yielded, summoning all my people, men and women."he looked at them all for an instant, then declared:"'this is not all.'"'your pardon, sir,' i replied; 'this is all, except my own maid who could not possibly be confounded with a convict.'"he asked: 'could i see her too?'"'certainly.'"i rang and rose appeared immediately. scarcely had she entered when he gave a signal, and two men, whom i had not seen, concealed behind the door, threw themselves upon her, seized her hands and bound them with cords."i uttered a cry of fury and was going to try and defend her. the captain stopped me:"'this girl, madame, is a man who calls himself john nicholas lecapet, condemned to death in 1879 for assassination preceded by violation. his sentence was changed to life imprisonment. he escaped four months ago. we have been on the search for him ever since.'"i was dismayed, struck dumb. i could not believe it. the policeman continued, laughing:"'i can only give you one proof. his right arm is tattooed.'"his sleeve was rolled up. it was true. the policeman added, certainly in bad taste:"'doubtless you will be satisfied without the other proofs.'"and he led away my maid!"well, if you will believe it, the feeling which was uppermost in me was that of anger at having been played with in this way, deceived and made ridiculous; it was not shame at having been dressed, undressed, handled and touched by this man, but--a--profound humiliation--the humiliation of a woman. do you understand?""no, not exactly.""let us see. think a minute. he had been condemned--for violation, this young man--and that--that humiliated me--there! now do you understand?"and mlle simone did not reply. she looked straight before her, with her eyes singularly fixed upon the two shining buttons of the livery and with that sphinx's smile that women have sometimes.as the mayor was about to sit down to breakfast, word was brought to him that the rural policeman, with two prisoners, was awaiting him at the hotel de ville. he went there at once and found old hochedur standing guard before a middle-class couple whom he was regarding with a severe expression on his face.the man, a fat old fellow with a red nose and white hair, seemed utterly dejected; while the woman, a little roundabout individual with shining cheeks, looked at the official who had arrested them, with defiant eyes."what is it? what is it, hochedur?"the rural policeman made his deposition: he had gone out that morning at his usual time, in order to patrol his beat from the forest of champioux as far as the boundaries of argenteuil. he had not noticed anything unusual in the country except that it was a fine day, and that the wheat was doing well, when the son of old bredel, who was going over his vines, called out to him: "here, daddy hochedur, go and have a look at the outskirts of the wood. in the first thicket you will find a pair of pigeons who must be a hundred and thirty years old between them!"he went in the direction indicated, entered the thicket, and there he heard words which made him suspect a flagrant breach of morality. advancing, therefore, on his hands and knees as if to surprise a poacher, he had arrested the couple whom he found there.the mayor looked at the culprits in astonishment, for the man was certainly sixty, and the woman fifty-five at least, and he began to question them, beginning with the man, who replied in such a weak voice that he could scarcely be heard."what is your name?""nicholas beaurain.""your occupation?""haberdasher, in the rue des martyrs, in paris.""what were you doing in the wood?"the haberdasher remained silent, with his eyes on his fat paunch, and his hands hanging at his sides, and the mayor continued:"do you deny what the officer of the municipal authorities states?""no, monsieur.""so you confess it?""yes, monsieur.""what have you to say in your defence?""nothing, monsieur.""where did you meet the partner in your misdemeanor?""she is my wife, monsieur.""your wife?""yes, monsieur.""then--then--you do not live together-in paris?""i beg your pardon, monsieur, but we are living together!""but in that case--you must be mad, altogether mad, my dear sir, to get caught playing lovers in the country at ten o'clock in the morning."the haberdasher seemed ready to cry with shame, and he muttered: "it was she who enticed me! i told her it was very stupid, but when a woman once gets a thing into her head--you know--you cannot get it out."the mayor, who liked a joke, smiled and replied: "in your case, the contrary ought to have happened. you would not be here, if she had had the idea only in her head."then monsieur beauain was seized with rage and turning to his wife, he said: "do you see to what you have brought us with your poetry? and now we shall have to go before the courts at our age, for a breach of morals! and we shall have to shut up the shop, sell our good will, and go to some other neighborhood! that's what it has come to."madame beaurain got up, and without looking at her husband, she explained herself without embarrassment, without useless modesty, and almost without hesitation."of course, monsieur, i know that we have made ourselves ridiculous. will you allow me to plead my cause like an advocate, or rather like a poor woman? and i hope that you will be kind enough to send us home, and to spare us the disgrace of a prosecution."years ago, when i was young, i made monsieur beaurain's acquaintance one sunday in this neighborhood. he was employed in a draper's shop, and i was a saleswoman in a ready-made clothing establishment. i remember it as if it were yesterday. i used to come and spend sundays here occasionally with a friend of mine, rose leveque, with whom i lived in the rue pigalle, and rose had a sweetheart, while i had none. he used to bring us here, and one saturday he told me laughing that he should bring a friend with him the next day. i quite understood what he meant, but i replied that it would be no good; for i was virtuous, monsieur."the next day we met monsieur beaurain at the railway station, and in those days he was good-looking, but i had made up my mind not to encourage him, and i did not. well, we arrived at bezons. it was a lovely day, the sort of day that touches your heart. when it is fine even now, just as it used to be formerly, i grow quite foolish, and when i am in the country i utterly lose my head. the green grass, the swallows flying so swiftly, the smell of the grass, the scarlet poppies, the daisies, all that makes me crazy. it is like champagne when one is not accustomed to it!"well, it was lovely weather, warm and bright, and it seemed to penetrate your body through your eyes when you looked and through your mouth when you breathed. rose and simon hugged and kissed each other every minute, and that gave me a queer feeling! monsieur beaurain and i walked behind them, without speaking much, for when people do not know each other, they do not find anything to talk about. he looked timid, and i liked to see his embarrassment. at last we got to the little wood; it was as cool as in a bath there, and we four sat down. rose and her lover teased me because i looked rather stern, but you will understand that i could not be otherwise. and then they began to kiss and hug again, without putting any more restraint upon themselves than if we had not been there; and then they whispered together, and got up and went off among the trees, without saying a word. you may fancy what i looked like, alone with this young fellow whom i saw for the first time. i felt so confused at seeing them go that it gave me courage, and i began to talk. i asked him what his business was, and he said he was a linen draper's assistant, as i told you just now. we talked for a few minutes, and that made him bold, and he wanted to take liberties with me, but i told him sharply to keep his place. is not that true, monsieur beaurain?"monsieur beaurain, who was looking at his feet in confusion, did not reply, and she continued: "then he saw that i was virtuous, and he began to make love to me nicely, like an honorable man, and from that time he came every sunday, for he was very much in love with me. i was very fond of him also, very fond of him! he was a good-looking fellow, formerly, and in short he married me the next september, and we started in business in the rue des martyrs."it was a hard struggle for some years, monsieur. business did not prosper, and we could not afford many country excursions, and, besides, we had got out of the way of them. one has other things in one's head, and thinks more of the cash box than of pretty speeches, when one is in business. we were growing old by degrees without perceiving it, like quiet people who do not think much about love. one does not regret anything as long as one does not notice what one has lost."and then, monsieur, business became better, and we were tranquil as to the future! then, you see, i do not exactly know what went on in my mind, no, i really do not know, but i began to dream like a little boarding-school girl. the sight of the little carts full of flowers which are drawn about the streets made me cry; the smell of violets sought me out in my easy-chair, behind my cash box, and made my heart beat! then i would get up and go out on the doorstep to look at the blue sky between the roofs. when one looks up at the sky from the street, it looks like a river which is descending on paris, winding as it flows, and the swallows pass to and fro in it like fish. these ideas are very stupid at my age! but how can one help it, monsieur, when one has worked all one's life? a moment comes in which one perceives that one could have done something else, and that one regrets, oh! yes, one feels intense regret! just think, for twenty years i might have gone and had kisses in the woods, like other women. i used to think how delightful it would be to lie under the trees and be in love with some one! and i thought of it every day and every night! i dreamed of the moonlight on the water, until i felt inclined to drown myself."i did not venture to speak to monsieur beaurain about this at first. i knew that he would make fun of me, and send me back to sell my needles and cotton! and then, to speak the truth, monsieur beaurain never said much to me, but when i looked in the glass, i also understood quite well that i no longer appealed to any one!"well, i made up my mind, and i proposed to him an excursion into the country, to the place where we had first become acquainted. he agreed without mistrusting anything, and we arrived here this morning, about nine o'clock."i felt quite young again when i got among the wheat, for a woman's heart never grows old! and really, i no longer saw my husband as he is at present, but just as he was formerly! that i will swear to you, monsieur. as true as i am standing here i was crazy. i began to kiss him, and he was more surprised than if i had tried to murder him. he kept saying to me: 'why, you must be mad! you are mad this morning! what is the matter with you?' i did not listen to him, i only listened to my own heart, and i made him come into the wood with me. that is all. i have spoken the truth, monsieur le maire, the whole truth."the mayor was a sensible man. he rose from his chair, smiled, and said: "go in peace, madame, and when you again visit our forests, be more discreet."they had loved each other before marriage with a pure and lofty love. they had first met on the sea-shore. he had thought this young girl charming, as she passed by with her light-colored parasol and her dainty dress amid the marine landscape against the horizon. he had loved her, blond and slender, in these surroundings of blue ocean and spacious sky. he could not distinguish the tenderness which this budding woman awoke in him from the vague and powerful emotion which the fresh salt air and the grand scenery of surf and sunshine and waves aroused in his soul.she, on the other hand, had loved him because he courted her, because he was young, rich, kind, and attentive. she had loved him because it is natural for young girls to love men who whisper sweet nothings to them.so, for three months, they had lived side by side, and hand in hand. the greeting which they exchanged in the morning before the bath, in the freshness of the morning, or in the evening on the sand, under the stars, in the warmth of a calm night, whispered low, very low, already had the flavor of kisses, though their lips had never met.each dreamed of the other at night, each thought of the other on awaking, and, without yet having voiced their sentiments, each longed for the other, body and soul.after marriage their love descended to earth. it was at first a tireless, sensuous passion, then exalted tenderness composed of tangible poetry, more refined caresses, and new and foolish inventions. every glance and gesture was an expression of passion.but, little by little, without even noticing it, they began to get tired of each other. love was still strong, but they had nothing more to reveal to each other, nothing more to learn from each other, no new tale of endearment, no unexpected outburst, no new way of expressing the well- known, oft-repeated verb.they tried, however, to rekindle the dwindling flame of the first love. every day they tried some new trick or desperate attempt to bring back to their hearts the uncooled ardor of their first days of married life. they tried moonlight walks under the trees, in the sweet warmth of the summer evenings: the poetry of mist-covered beaches; the excitement of public festivals.one morning henriette said to paul:"will you take me to a cafe for dinner?""certainly, dearie.""to some well-known cafe?""of course!"he looked at her with a questioning glance, seeing that she was thinking of something which she did not wish to tell.she went on:"you know, one of those cafes--oh, how can i explain myself?--a sporty cafe!"he smiled: "of course, i understand--you mean in one of the cafes which are commonly called bohemian.""yes, that's it. but take me to one of the big places, one where you are known, one where you have already supped--no--dined--well, you know--i--- -i--oh! i will never dare say it!""go ahead, dearie. little secrets should no longer exist between us.""no, i dare not.""go on; don't be prudish. tell me.""well, i--i--i want to be taken for your sweetheart--there! and i want the boys, who do not know that you are married, to take me for such; and you too--i want you to think that i am your sweetheart for one hour, in that place which must hold so many memories for you. there! and i will play that i am your sweetheart. it's awful, i know--i am abominably ashamed, i am as red as a peony. don't look at me!"he laughed, greatly amused, and answered:"all right, we will go to-night to a very swell place where i am well known."toward seven o'clock they went up the stairs of one of the big cafes on the boulevard, he, smiling, with the look of a conqueror, she, timid, veiled, delighted. they were immediately shown to one of the luxurious private dining-rooms, furnished with four large arm-chairs and a red plush couch. the head waiter entered and brought them the menu. paul handed it to his wife."what do you want to eat?""i don't care; order whatever is good."after handing his coat to the waiter, he ordered dinner and champagne. the waiter looked at the young woman and smiled. he took the order and murmured:"will monsieur paul have his champagne sweet or dry?""dry, very dry."henriette was pleased to hear that this man knew her husband's name. they sat on the couch, side by side, and began to eat.ten candles lighted the room and were reflected in the mirrors all around them, which seemed to increase the brilliancy a thousand-fold. henriette drank glass after glass in order to keep up her courage, although she felt dizzy after the first few glasses. paul, excited by the memories which returned to him, kept kissing his wife's hands. his eyes were sparkling.she was feeling strangely excited in this new place, restless, pleased, a little guilty, but full of life. two waiters, serious, silent, accustomed to seeing and forgetting everything, to entering the room only when it was necessary and to leaving it when they felt they were intruding, were silently flitting hither and thither.toward the middle of the dinner, henriette was well under the influence of champagne. she was prattling along fearlessly, her cheeks flushed, her eyes glistening."come, paul; tell me everything.""what, sweetheart?""i don't dare tell you.""go on!""have you loved many women before me?"he hesitated, a little perplexed, not knowing whether he should hide his adventures or boast of them.she continued:"oh! please tell me. how many have you loved?""a few.""how many?""i don't know. how do you expect me to know such things?""haven't you counted them?""of course not.""then you must have loved a good many!""perhaps.""about how many? just tell me about how many.""but i don't know, dearest. some years a good many, and some years only a few.""how many a year, did you say?""sometimes twenty or thirty, sometimes only four or five.""oh! that makes more than a hundred in all!""yes, just about.""oh! i think that is dreadful!""why dreadful?""because it's dreadful when you think of it--all those women--and always --always the same thing. oh! it's dreadful, just the same--more than a hundred women!"he was surprised that she should think that dreadful, and answered, with the air of superiority which men take with women when they wish to make them understand that they have said something foolish:"that's funny! if it is dreadful to have a hundred women, it's dreadful to have one.""oh, no, not at all!""why not?""because with one woman you have a real bond of love which attaches you to her, while with a hundred women it's not the same at all. there is no real love. i don't understand how a man can associate with such women.""but they are all right.""no, they can't be!""yes, they are!""oh, stop; you disgust me!""but then, why did you ask me how many sweethearts i had had?""because----""that's no reason!""what were they-actresses, little shop-girls, or society women?""a few of each.""it must have been rather monotonous toward the last.""oh, no; it's amusing to change."she remained thoughtful, staring at her champagne glass. it was full-- she drank it in one gulp; then putting it back on the table, she threw her arms around her husband's neck and murmured in his ear:"oh! how i love you, sweetheart! how i love you!"he threw his arms around her in a passionate embrace. a waiter, who was just entering, backed out, closing the door discreetly. in about five minutes the head waiter came back, solemn and dignified, bringing the fruit for dessert. she was once more holding between her fingers a full glass, and gazing into the amber liquid as though seeking unknown things. she murmured in a dreamy voice:"yes, it must be fun!"resembling in appearance all the wooden hostelries of the high alps situated at the foot of glaciers in the barren rocky gorges that intersect the summits of the mountains, the inn of schwarenbach serves as a resting place for travellers crossing the gemini pass.it remains open for six months in the year and is inhabited by the family of jean hauser; then, as soon as the snow begins to fall and to fill the valley so as to make the road down to loeche impassable, the father and his three sons go away and leave the house in charge of the old guide, gaspard hari, with the young guide, ulrich kunsi, and sam, the great mountain dog.the two men and the dog remain till the spring in their snowy prison, with nothing before their eyes except the immense white slopes of the balmhorn, surrounded by light, glistening summits, and are shut in, blocked up and buried by the snow which rises around them and which envelops, binds and crushes the little house, which lies piled on the roof, covering the windows and blocking up the door.it was the day on which the hauser family were going to return to loeche, as winter was approaching, and the descent was becoming dangerous. three mules started first, laden with baggage and led by the three sons. then the mother, jeanne hauser, and her daughter louise mounted a fourth mule and set off in their turn and the father followed them, accompanied by the two men in charge, who were to escort the family as far as the brow of the descent. first of all they passed round the small lake, which was now frozen over, at the bottom of the mass of rocks which stretched in front of the inn, and then they followed the valley, which was dominated on all sides by the snow-covered summits.a ray of sunlight fell into that little white, glistening, frozen desert and illuminated it with a cold and dazzling flame. no living thing appeared among this ocean of mountains. there was no motion in this immeasurable solitude and no noise disturbed the profound silence.by degrees the young guide, ulrich kunsi, a tall, long-legged swiss, left old man hauser and old gaspard behind, in order to catch up the mule which bore the two women. the younger one looked at him as he approached and appeared to be calling him with her sad eyes. she was a young, fairhaired little peasant girl, whose milk-white cheeks and pale hair looked as if they had lost their color by their long abode amid the ice. when he had got up to the animal she was riding he put his hand on the crupper and relaxed his speed. mother hauser began to talk to him, enumerating with the minutest details all that he would have to attend to during the winter. it was the first time that he was going to stay up there, while old hari had already spent fourteen winters amid the snow, at the inn of schwarenbach.ulrich kunsi listened, without appearing to understand and looked incessantly at the girl. from time to time he replied: "yes, madame hauser," but his thoughts seemed far away and his calm features remained unmoved.they reached lake daube, whose broad, frozen surface extended to the end of the valley. on the right one saw the black, pointed, rocky summits of the daubenhorn beside the enormous moraines of the lommern glacier, above which rose the wildstrubel. as they approached the gemmi pass, where the descent of loeche begins, they suddenly beheld the immense horizon of the alps of the valais, from which the broad, deep valley of the rhone separated them.in the distance there was a group of white, unequal, flat, or pointed mountain summits, which glistened in the sun; the mischabel with its two peaks, the huge group of the weisshorn, the heavy brunegghorn, the lofty and formidable pyramid of mount cervin, that slayer of men, and the dent- blanche, that monstrous coquette.then beneath them, in a tremendous hole, at the bottom of a terrific abyss, they perceived loeche, where houses looked as grains of sand which had been thrown into that enormous crevice that is ended and closed by the gemmi and which opens, down below, on the rhone.the mule stopped at the edge of the path, which winds and turns continually, doubling backward, then, fantastically and strangely, along the side of the mountain as far as the almost invisible little village at its feet. the women jumped into the snow and the two old men joined them. "well," father hauser said, "good-by, and keep up your spirits till next year, my friends," and old hari replied: "till next year."they embraced each other and then madame hauser in her turn offered her cheek, and the girl did the same.when ulrich kunsi's turn came, he whispered in louise's ear, "do not forget those up yonder," and she replied, "no," in such a low voice that he guessed what she had said without hearing it. "well, adieu," jean hauser repeated, "and don't fall ill." and going before the two women, he commenced the descent, and soon all three disappeared at the first turn in the road, while the two men returned to the inn at schwarenbach.they walked slowly, side by side, without speaking. it was over, and they would be alone together for four or five months. then gaspard hari began to relate his life last winter. he had remained with michael canol, who was too old now to stand it, for an accident might happen during that long solitude. they had not been dull, however; the only thing was to make up one's mind to it from the first, and in the end one would find plenty of distraction, games and other means of whiling away the time.ulrich kunsi listened to him with his eyes on the ground, for in his thoughts he was following those who were descending to the village. they soon came in sight of the inn, which was, however, scarcely visible, so small did it look, a black speck at the foot of that enormous billow of snow, and when they opened the door sam, the great curly dog, began to romp round them."come, my boy," old gaspard said, "we have no women now, so we must get our own dinner ready. go and peel the potatoes." and they both sat down on wooden stools and began to prepare the soup.the next morning seemed very long to kunsi. old hari smoked and spat on the hearth, while the young man looked out of the window at the snow- covered mountain opposite the house.in the afternoon he went out, and going over yesterday's ground again, he looked for the traces of the mule that had carried the two women. then when he had reached the gemmi pass, he laid himself down on his stomach and looked at loeche.the village, in its rocky pit, was not yet buried under the snow, from which it was sheltered by the pine woods which protected it on all sides. its low houses looked like paving stones in a large meadow from above. hauser's little daughter was there now in one of those gray-colored houses. in which? ulrich kunsi was too far away to be able to make them out separately. how he would have liked to go down while he was yet able!but the sun had disappeared behind the lofty crest of the wildstrubel and the young man returned to the chalet. daddy hari was smoking, and when he saw his mate come in he proposed a game of cards to him, and they sat down opposite each other, on either side of the table. they played for a long time a simple game called brisque and then they had supper and went to bed.the following days were like the first, bright and cold, without any fresh snow. old gaspard spent his afternoons in watching the eagles and other rare birds which ventured on those frozen heights, while ulrich returned regularly to the gemmi pass to look at the village. then they played cards, dice or dominoes and lost and won a trifle, just to create an interest in the game.one morning hari, who was up first, called his companion. a moving, deep and light cloud of white spray was falling on them noiselessly and was by degrees burying them under a thick, heavy coverlet of foam. that lasted four days and four nights. it was necessary to free the door and the windows, to dig out a passage and to cut steps to get over this frozen powder, which a twelve hours' frost had made as hard as the granite of the moraines.they lived like prisoners and did not venture outside their abode. they had divided their duties, which they performed regularly. ulrich kunsi undertook the scouring, washing and everything that belonged to cleanliness. he also chopped up the wood while gaspard hari did the cooking and attended to the fire. their regular and monotonous work was interrupted by long games at cards or dice, and they never quarrelled, but were always calm and placid. they were never seen impatient or ill- humored, nor did they ever use hard words, for they had laid in a stock of patience for their wintering on the top of the mountain.sometimes old gaspard took his rifle and went after chamois, and occasionally he killed one. then there was a feast in the inn at schwarenbach and they revelled in fresh meat. one morning he went out as usual. the thermometer outside marked eighteen degrees of frost, and as the sun had not yet risen, the hunter hoped to surprise the animals at the approaches to the wildstrubel, and ulrich, being alone, remained in bed until ten o'clock. he was of a sleepy nature, but he would not have dared to give way like that to his inclination in the presence of the old guide, who was ever an early riser. he breakfasted leisurely with sam, who also spent his days and nights in sleeping in front of the fire; then he felt low-spirited and even frightened at the solitude, and was-seized by a longing for his daily game of cards, as one is by the craving of a confirmed habit, and so he went out to meet his companion, who was to return at four o'clock.the snow had levelled the whole deep valley, filled up the crevasses, obliterated all signs of the two lakes and covered the rocks, so that between the high summits there was nothing but an immense, white, regular, dazzling and frozen surface. for three weeks ulrich had not been to the edge of the precipice from which he had looked down on the village, and he wanted to go there before climbing the slopes which led to wildstrubel. loeche was now also covered by the snow and the houses could scarcely be distinguished, covered as they were by that white cloak.then, turning to the right, he reached the loemmern glacier. he went along with a mountaineer's long strides, striking the snow, which was as hard as a rock, with his ironpointed stick, and with his piercing eyes he looked for the little black, moving speck in the distance, on that enormous, white expanse.when he reached the end of the glacier he stopped and asked himself whether the old man had taken that road, and then he began to walk along the moraines with rapid and uneasy steps. the day was declining, the snow was assuming a rosy tint, and a dry, frozen wind blew in rough gusts over its crystal surface. ulrich uttered a long, shrill, vibrating call. his voice sped through the deathlike silence in which the mountains were sleeping; it reached the distance, across profound and motionless waves of glacial foam, like the cry of a bird across the waves of the sea. then it died away and nothing answered him.he began to walk again. the sun had sunk yonder behind the mountain tops, which were still purple with the reflection from the sky, but the depths of the valley were becoming gray, and suddenly the young man felt frightened. it seemed to him as if the silence, the cold, the solitude, the winter death of these mountains were taking possession of him, were going to stop and to freeze his blood, to make his limbs grow stiff and to turn him into a motionless and frozen object, and he set off running, fleeing toward his dwelling. the old man, he thought, would have returned during his absence. he had taken another road; he would, no doubt, be sitting before the fire, with a dead chamois at his feet. he soon came in sight of the inn, but no smoke rose from it. ulrich walked faster and opened the door. sam ran up to him to greet him, but gaspard hari had not returned. kunsi, in his alarm, turned round suddenly, as if he had expected to find his comrade hidden in a corner. then he relighted the fire and made the soup, hoping every moment to see the old man come in. from time to time he went out to see if he were not coming. it was quite night now, that wan, livid night of the mountains, lighted by a thin, yellow crescent moon, just disappearing behind the mountain tops.then the young man went in and sat down to warm his hands and feet, while he pictured to himself every possible accident. gaspard might have broken a leg, have fallen into a crevasse, taken a false step and dislocated his ankle. and, perhaps, he was lying on the snow, overcome and stiff with the cold, in agony of mind, lost and, perhaps, shouting for help, calling with all his might in the silence of the night.. but where? the mountain was so vast, so rugged, so dangerous in places, especially at that time of the year, that it would have required ten or twenty guides to walk for a week in all directions to find a man in that immense space. ulrich kunsi, however, made up his mind to set out with sam if gaspard did not return by one in the morning, and he made his preparations.he put provisions for two days into a bag, took his steel climbing iron, tied a long, thin, strong rope round his waist, and looked to see that his ironshod stick and his axe, which served to cut steps in the ice, were in order. then he waited. the fire was burning on the hearth, the great dog was snoring in front of it, and the clock was ticking, as regularly as a heart beating, in its resounding wooden case. he waited, with his ears on the alert for distant sounds, and he shivered when the wind blew against the roof and the walls. it struck twelve and he trembled: then, frightened and shivering, he put some water on the fire, so that he might have some hot coffee before starting, and when the clock struck one he got up, woke sam, opened the door and went off in the direction of the wildstrubel. for five hours he mounted, scaling the rocks by means of his climbing irons, cutting into the ice, advancing continually, and occasionally hauling up the dog, who remained below at the foot of some slope that was too steep for him, by means of the rope. it was about six o'clock when he reached one of the summits to which old gaspard often came after chamois, and he waited till it should be daylight.the sky was growing pale overhead, and a strange light, springing nobody could tell whence, suddenly illuminated the immense ocean of pale mountain summits, which extended for a hundred leagues around him. one might have said that this vague brightness arose from the snow itself and spread abroad in space. by degrees the highest distant summits assumed a delicate, pink flesh color, and the red sun appeared behind the ponderous giants of the bernese alps.ulrich kunsi set off again, walking like a hunter, bent over, looking for tracks, and saying to his dog: "seek, old fellow, seek!"he was descending the mountain now, scanning the depths closely, and from time to time shouting, uttering aloud, prolonged cry, which soon died away in that silent vastness. then he put his ear to the ground to listen. he thought he could distinguish a voice, and he began to run and shouted again, but he heard nothing more and sat down, exhausted and in despair. toward midday he breakfasted and gave sam, who was as tired as himself, something to eat also, and then he recommenced his search.when evening came he was still walking, and he had walked more than thirty miles over the mountains. as he was too far away to return home and too tired to drag himself along any further, he dug a hole in the snow and crouched in it with his dog under a blanket which he had brought with him. and the man and the dog lay side by side, trying to keep warm, but frozen to the marrow nevertheless. ulrich scarcely slept, his mind haunted by visions and his limbs shaking with cold.day was breaking when he got up. his legs were as stiff as iron bars and his spirits so low that he was ready to cry with anguish, while his heart was beating so that he almost fell over with agitation, when he thought he heard a noise.suddenly he imagined that he also was going to die of cold in the midst of this vast solitude, and the terror of such a death roused his energies and gave him renewed vigor. he was descending toward the inn, falling down and getting up again, and followed at a distance by sam, who was limping on three legs, and they did not reach schwarenbach until four o'clock in the afternoon. the house was empty and the young man made a fire, had something to eat and went to sleep, so worn out that he did not think of anything more.he slept for a long time, for a very long time, an irresistible sleep. but suddenly a voice, a cry, a name, "ulrich!" aroused him from his profound torpor and made him sit up in bed. had he been dreaming? was it one of those strange appeals which cross the dreams of disquieted minds? no, he heard it still, that reverberating cry-which had entered his ears and remained in his flesh-to the tips of his sinewy fingers. certainly somebody had cried out and called "ulrich!" there was somebody there near the house, there could be no doubt of that, and he opened the door and shouted, "is it you, gaspard?" with all the strength of his lungs. but there was no reply, no murmur, no groan, nothing. it was quite dark and the snow looked wan.the wind had risen, that icy wind that cracks the rocks and leaves nothing alive on those deserted heights, and it came in sudden gusts, which were more parching and more deadly than the burning wind of the desert, and again ulrich shouted: "gaspard! gaspard! gaspard." and then he waited again. everything was silent on the mountain.then he shook with terror and with a bound he was inside the inn, when he shut and bolted the door, and then he fell into a chair trembling all over, for he felt certain that his comrade had called him at the moment he was expiring.he was sure of that, as sure as one is of being alive or of eating a piece of bread. old gaspard hari had been dying for two days and three nights somewhere, in some hole, in one of those deep, untrodden ravines whose whiteness is more sinister than subterranean darkness. he had been dying for two days and three nights and be had just then died, thinking of his comrade. his soul, almost before it was released, had taken its flight to the inn where ulrich was sleeping, and it had called him by that terrible and mysterious power which the spirits of the dead have to haunt the living. that voiceless soul had cried to the worn-out soul of the sleeper; it had uttered its last farewell, or its reproach, or its curse on the man who had not searched carefully enough.and ulrich felt that it was there, quite close to him, behind the wall, behind the door which be had just fastened. it was wandering about, like a night bird which lightly touches a lighted window with his wings, and the terrified young man was ready to scream with horror. he wanted to run away, but did not dare to go out; he did not dare, and he should never dare to do it in the future, for that phantom would remain there day and night, round the inn, as long as the old man's body was not recovered and had not been deposited in the consecrated earth of a churchyard.when it was daylight kunsi recovered some of his courage at the return of the bright sun. he prepared his meal, gave his dog some food and then remained motionless on a chair, tortured at heart as he thought of the old man lying on the snow, and then, as soon as night once more covered the mountains, new terrors assailed him. he now walked up and down the dark kitchen, which was scarcely lighted by the flame of one candle, and he walked from one end of it to the other with great strides, listening, listening whether the terrible cry of the other night would again break the dreary silence outside. he felt himself alone, unhappy man, as no man had ever been alone before! he was alone in this immense desert of snow, alone five thousand feet above the inhabited earth, above human habitation, above that stirring, noisy, palpitating life, alone under an icy sky! a mad longing impelled him to run away, no matter where, to get down to loeche by flinging himself over the precipice; but he did not even dare to open the door, as he felt sure that the other, the dead man, would bar his road, so that he might not be obliged to remain up there alone:toward midnight, tired with walking, worn out by grief and fear, he at last fell into a doze in his chair, for he was afraid of his bed as one is of a haunted spot. but suddenly the strident cry of the other evening pierced his ears, and it was so shrill that ulrich stretched out his arms to repulse the ghost, and he fell backward with his chair.sam, who was awakened by the noise, began to howl as frightened dogs do howl, and he walked all about the house trying to find out where the danger came from. when he got to the door, he sniffed beneath it, smelling vigorously, with his coat bristling and his tail stiff, while he growled angrily. kunsi, who was terrified, jumped up, and, holding his chair by one leg, he cried: "don't come in, don't come in, or i shall kill you." and the dog, excited by this threat, barked angrily at that invisible enemy who defied his master's voice. by degrees, however, he quieted down and came back and stretched himself in front of the fire, but he was uneasy and kept his head up and growled between his teeth.ulrich, in turn, recovered his senses, but as he felt faint with terror, he went and got a bottle of brandy out of the sideboard, and he drank off several glasses, one after anther, at a gulp. his ideas became vague, his courage revived and a feverish glow ran through his veins.he ate scarcely anything the next day and limited himself to alcohol, and so he lived for several days, like a drunken brute. as soon as he thought of gaspard hari, he began to drink again, and went on drinking until he fell to the ground, overcome by intoxication. and there he remained lying on his face, dead drunk, his limbs benumbed, and snoring loudly. but scarcely had he digested the maddening and burning liquor than the same cry, "ulrich!" woke him like a bullet piercing his brain, and he got up, still staggering, stretching out his hands to save himself from falling, and calling to sam to help him. and the dog, who appeared to be going mad like his master, rushed to the door, scratched it with his claws and gnawed it with his long white teeth, while the young man, with his head thrown back drank the brandy in draughts, as if it had been cold water, so that it might by and by send his thoughts, his frantic terror, and his memory to sleep again.in three weeks he had consumed all his stock of ardent spirits. but his continual drunkenness only lulled his terror, which awoke more furiously than ever as soon as it was impossible for him to calm it. his fixed idea then, which had been intensified by a month of drunkenness, and which was continually increasing in his absolute solitude, penetrated him like a gimlet. he now walked about the house like a wild beast in its cage, putting his ear to the door to listen if the other were there and defying him through the wall. then, as soon as he dozed, overcome by fatigue, he heard the voice which made him leap to his feet.at last one night, as cowards do when driven to extremities, he sprang to the door and opened it, to see who was calling him and to force him to keep quiet, but such a gust of cold wind blew into his face that it chilled him to the bone, and he closed and bolted the door again immediately, without noticing that sam had rushed out. then, as he was shivering with cold, he threw some wood on the fire and sat down in front of it to warm himself, but suddenly he started, for somebody was scratching at the wall and crying. in desperation he called out: "go away!" but was answered by another long, sorrowful wail.then all his remaining senses forsook him from sheer fright. he repeated: "go away!" and turned round to try to find some corner in which to hide, while the other person went round the house still crying and rubbing against the wall. ulrich went to the oak sideboard, which was full of plates and dishes and of provisions, and lifting it up with superhuman strength, he dragged it to the door, so as to form a barricade. then piling up all the rest of the furniture, the mattresses, palliasses and chairs, he stopped up the windows as one does when assailed by an enemy.but the person outside now uttered long, plaintive, mournful groans, to which the young man replied by similar groans, and thus days and nights passed without their ceasing to howl at each other. the one was continually walking round the house and scraped the walls with his nails so vigorously that it seemed as if he wished to destroy them, while the other, inside, followed all his movements, stooping down and holding his ear to the walls and replying to all his appeals with terrible cries. one evening, however, ulrich heard nothing more, and he sat down, so overcome by fatigue, that he went to sleep immediately and awoke in the morning without a thought, without any recollection of what had happened, just as if his head had been emptied during his heavy sleep, but he felt hungry, and he ate.the winter was over and the gemmi pass was practicable again, so the hauser family started off to return to their inn. as soon as they had reached the top of the ascent the women mounted their mule and spoke about the two men whom they would meet again shortly. they were, indeed, rather surprised that neither of them had come down a few days before, as soon as the road was open, in order to tell them all about their long winter sojourn. at last, however, they saw the inn, still covered with snow, like a quilt. the door and the window were closed, but a little smoke was coming out of the chimney, which reassured old hauser. on going up to the door, however, he saw the skeleton of an animal which had been torn to pieces by the eagles, a large skeleton lying on its side.they all looked close at it and the mother said:"that must be sam," and then she shouted: "hi, gaspard!" a cry from the interior of the house answered her and a sharp cry that one might have thought some animal had uttered it. old hauser repeated, "hi, gaspard!" and they heard another cry similar to the first.then the three men, the father and the two sons, tried to open the door, but it resisted their efforts. from the empty cow-stall they took a beam to serve as a battering-ram and hurled it against the door with all their might. the wood gave way and the boards flew into splinters. then the house was shaken by a loud voice, and inside, behind the side board which was overturned, they saw a man standing upright, with his hair falling on his shoulders and a beard descending to his breast, with shining eyes, and nothing but rags to cover him. they did not recognize him, but louise hauser exclaimed:"it is ulrich, mother." and her mother declared that it was ulrich, although his hair was white.he allowed them to go up to him and to touch him, but he did not reply to any of their questions, and they were obliged to take him to loeche, where the doctors found that he was mad, and nobody ever found out what had become of his companion.little louise hauser nearly died that summer of decline, which the physicians attributed to the cold air of the mountains.two years ago this spring i was making a walking tour along the shore of the mediterranean. is there anything more pleasant than to meditate while walking at a good pace along a highway? one walks in the sunlight, through the caressing breeze, at the foot of the mountains, along the coast of the sea. and one dreams! what a flood of illusions, loves, adventures pass through a pedestrian's mind during a two hours' march! what a crowd of confused and joyous hopes enter into you with the mild, light air! you drink them in with the breeze, and they awaken in your heart a longing for happiness which increases with the hun ger induced by walking. the fleeting, charming ideas fly and sing like birds.i was following that long road which goes from saint raphael to italy, or, rather, that long, splendid panoramic highway which seems made for the representation of all the love-poems of earth. and i thought that from cannes, where one poses, to monaco, where one gambles, people come to this spot of the earth for hardly any other purpose than to get embroiled or to throw away money on chance games, displaying under this delicious sky and in this garden of roses and oranges all base vanities and foolish pretensions and vile lusts, showing up the human mind such as it is, servile, ignorant, arrogant and full of cupidity.suddenly i saw some villas in one of those ravishing bays that one meets at every turn of the mountain; there were only four or five fronting the sea at the foot of the mountains, and behind them a wild fir wood slopes into two great valleys, that were untraversed by roads. i stopped short before one of these chalets, it was so pretty: a small white house with brown trimmings, overrun with rambler roses up to the top.the garden was a mass of flowers, of all colors and all kinds, mixed in a coquettish, well-planned disorder. the lawn was full of them, big pots flanked each side of every step of the porch, pink or yellow clusters framed each window, and the terrace with the stone balustrade, which enclosed this pretty little dwelling, had a garland of enormous red bells, like drops of blood. behind the house i saw a long avenue of orange trees in blossom, which went up to the foot of the mountain.over the door appeared the name, "villa d'antan," in small gold letters.i asked myself what poet or what fairy was living there, what inspired, solitary being had discovered this spot and created this dream house, which seemed to nestle in a nosegay.a workman was breaking stones up the street, and i went to him to ask the name of the proprietor of this jewel."it is madame julie romain," he replied.julie romain! in my childhood, long ago, i had heard them speak of this great actress, the rival of rachel.no woman ever was more applauded and more loved--especially more loved! what duets and suicides on her account and what sensational adventures! how old was this seductive woman now? sixty, seventy, seventy-five! julie romain here, in this house! the woman who had been adored by the greatest musician and the most exquisite poet of our land! i still remember the sensation (i was then twelve years of age) which her flight to sicily with the latter, after her rupture with the former, caused throughout france.she had left one evening, after a premiere, where the audience had applauded her for a whole half hour, and had recalled her eleven times in succession. she had gone away with the poet, in a post-chaise, as was the fashion then; they had crossed the sea, to love each other in that antique island, the daughter of greece, in that immense orange wood which surrounds palermo, and which is called the "shell of gold."people told of their ascension of mount etna and how they had leaned over the immense crater, arm in arm, cheek to cheek, as if to throw themselves into the very abyss.now he was dead, that maker of verses so touching and so profound that they turned, the heads of a whole generation, so subtle and so mysterious that they opened a new world to the younger poets.the other one also was dead--the deserted one, who had attained through her musical periods that are alive in the memories of all, periods of triumph and of despair, intoxicating triumph and heartrending despair.and she was there, in that house veiled by flowers.i did not hesitate, but rang the bell.a small servant answered, a boy of eighteen with awkward mien and clumsy hands. i wrote in pencil on my card a gallant compliment to the actress, begging her to receive me. perhaps, if she knew my name, she would open her door to me.the little valet took it in, and then came back, asking me to follow him. he led me to a neat and decorous salon, furnished in the louis-philippe style, with stiff and heavy furniture, from which a little maid of sixteen, slender but not pretty, took off the covers in my honor.then i was left alone.on the walls hung three portraits, that of the actress in one of her roles, that of the poet in his close-fitting greatcoat and the ruffled shirt then in style, and that of the musician seated at a piano.she, blond, charming, but affected, according to the fashion of her day, was smiling, with her pretty mouth and blue eyes; the painting was careful, fine, elegant, but lifeless.those faces seemed to be already looking upon posterity.the whole place had the air of a bygone time, of days that were done and men who had vanished.a door opened and a little woman entered, old, very old, very small, with white hair and white eyebrows, a veritable white mouse, and as quick and furtive of movement.she held out her hand to me, saying in a voice still fresh, sonorous and vibrant:"thank you, monsieur. how kind it is of the men of to-day to remember the women of yesterday! sit down."i told her that her house had attracted me, that i had inquired for the proprietor's name, and that, on learning it, i could not resist the desire to ring her bell."this gives me all the more pleasure, monsieur," she replied, "as it is the first time that such a thing has happened. when i received your card, with the gracious note, i trembled as if an old friend who had disappeared for twenty years had been announced to me. i am like a dead body, whom no one remembers, of whom no one will think until the day when i shall actually die; then the newspapers will mention julie romain for three days, relating anecdotes and details of my life, reviving memories, and praising me greatly. then all will be over with me."after a few moments of silence, she continued:"and this will not be so very long now. in a few months, in a few days, nothing will remain but a little skeleton of this little woman who is now alive."she raised her eyes toward her portrait, which smiled down upon this caricature of herself; then she looked at those of the two men, the disdainful poet and the inspired musician, who seemed to say: "what does this ruin want of us?"an indefinable, poignant, irresistible sadness overwhelmed my heart, the sadness of existences that have had their day, but who are still debating with their memories, like a person drowning in deep water.from my seat i could see on the highroad the handsome carriages that were whirling from nice to monaco; inside them i saw young, pretty, rich and happy women and smiling, satisfied men. following my eye, she understood my thought and murmured with a smile of resignation:"one cannot both be and have been.""how beautiful life must have been for you!" i said.she heaved a great sigh."beautiful and sweet! and for that reason i regret it so much."i saw that she was disposed to talk of herself, so i began to question her, gently and discreetly, as one might touch bruised flesh.she spoke of her successes, her intoxications and her friends, of her whole triumphant existence."was it on the stage that you found your most intense joys, your true happiness?" i asked."oh, no!" she replied quickly.i smiled; then, raising her eyes to the two portraits, she said, with a sad glance:"it was with them.""which one?" i could not help asking."both. i even confuse them up a little now in my old woman's memory, and then i feel remorse.""then, madame, your acknowledgment is not to them, but to love itself. they were merely its interpreters.""that is possible. but what interpreters!""are you sure that you have not been, or that you might not have been, loved as well or better by a simple man, but not a great man, who would have offered to you his whole life and heart, all his thoughts, all his days, his whole being, while these gave you two redoubtable rivals, music and poetry?""no, monsieur, no!" she exclaimed emphatically, with that still youthful voice, which caused the soul to vibrate. "another one might perhaps have loved me more, but he would not have loved me as these did. ah! those two sang to me of the music of love as no one else in the world could have sung of it. how they intoxicated me! could any other man express what they knew so well how to express in tones and in words? is it enough merely to love if one cannot put all the poetry and all the music of heaven and earth into love? and they knew how to make a woman delirious with songs and with words. yes, perhaps there was more of illusion than of reality in our passion; but these illusions lift you into the clouds, while realities always leave you trailing in the dust. if others have loved me more, through these two i have understood, felt and worshipped love."suddenly she began to weep.she wept silently, shedding tears of despair.i pretended not to see, looking off into the distance. she resumed, after a few minutes:"you see, monsieur, with nearly every one the heart ages with the body. but this has not happened with me. my body is sixty-nine years old, while my poor heart is only twenty. and that is the reason why i live all alone, with my flowers and my dreams."there was a long silence between us. she grew calmer and continued, smiling:"how you would laugh at me, if you knew, if you knew how i pass my evenings, when the weather is fine. i am ashamed and i pity myself at the same time."beg as i might, she would not tell me what she did. then i rose to leave."already!" she exclaimed.and as i said that i wished to dine at monte carlo, she asked timidly:"will you not dine with me? it would give me a great deal of pleasure."i accepted at once. she rang, delighted, and after giving some orders to the little maid she took me over her house.a kind of glass-enclosed veranda, filled with shrubs, opened into the dining-room, revealing at the farther end the long avenue of orange trees extending to the foot of the mountain. a low seat, hidden by plants, indicated that the old actress often came there to sit down.then we went into the garden, to look at the flowers. evening fell softly, one of those calm, moist evenings when the earth breathes forth all her perfumes. daylight was almost gone when we sat down at table. the dinner was good and it lasted a long time, and we became intimate friends, she and i, when she understood what a profound sympathy she had aroused in my heart. she had taken two thimblefuls of wine, as the phrase goes, and had grown more confiding and expansive."come, let us look at the moon," she said. "i adore the good moon. she has been the witness of my most intense joys. it seems to me that all my memories are there, and that i need only look at her to bring them all back to me. and even--some times--in the evening--i offer to myself a pretty play--yes, pretty--if you only knew! but no, you would laugh at me. i cannot--i dare not--no, no--really--no."i implored her to tell me what it was."come, now! come, tell me; i promise you that i will not laugh. i swear it to you--come, now!"she hesitated. i took her hands--those poor little hands, so thin and so cold!--and i kissed them one after the other, several times, as her lovers had once kissed them. she was moved and hesitated."you promise me not to laugh?""yes, i swear it to you.""well, then, come."she rose, and as the little domestic, awkward in his green livery, removed the chair behind her, she whispered quickly a few words into his ear."yes, madame, at once," he replied.she took my arm and led me to the veranda.the avenue of oranges was really splendid to see. the full moon made a narrow path of silver, a long bright line, which fell on the yellow sand, between the round, opaque crowns of the dark trees.as these trees were in bloom, their strong, sweet perfume filled the night, and swarming among their dark foliage i saw thousands of fireflies, which looked like seeds fallen from the stars."oh, what a setting for a love scene!" i exclaimed.she smiled."is it not true? is it not true? you will see!"and she made me sit down beside her."this is what makes one long for more life. but you hardly think of these things, you men of to-day. you are speculators, merchants and men of affairs.you no longer even know how to talk to us. when i say 'you,' i mean young men in general. love has been turned into a liaison which very often begins with an unpaid dressmaker's bill. if you think the bill is dearer than the woman, you disappear; but if you hold the woman more highly, you pay it. nice morals--and a nice kind of love!"she took my hand."look!"i looked, astonished and delighted. down there at the end of the avenue, in the moonlight, were two young people, with their arms around each other's waist. they were walking along, interlaced, charming, with short, little steps, crossing the flakes of light; which illuminated them momentarily, and then sinking back into the shadow. the youth was dressed in a suit of white satin, such as men wore in the eighteenth century, and had on a hat with an ostrich plume. the girl was arrayed in a gown with panniers, and the high, powdered coiffure of the handsome dames of the time of the regency.they stopped a hundred paces from us, and standing in the middle of the avenue, they kissed each other with graceful gestures.suddenly i recognized the two little servants. then one of those dreadful fits of laughter that convulse you made me writhe in my chair. but i did not laugh aloud. i resisted, convulsed and feeling almost ill, as a man whose leg is cut off resists the impulse to cry out.as the young pair turned toward the farther end of the avenue they again became delightful. they went farther and farther away, finally disappearing as a dream disappears. i no longer saw them. the avenue seemed a sad place.i took my leave at once, so as not to see them again, for i guessed that this little play would last a long time, awakening, as it did, a whole past of love and of stage scenery; the artificial past, deceitful and seductive, false but charming, which still stirred the heart of this amorous old comedienne.my little darling: so you are crying from morning until night and from night until morning, because your husband leaves you; you do not know what to do and so you ask your old aunt for advice; you must consider her quite an expert. i don't know as much as you think i do, and yet i am not entirely ignorant of the art of loving, or, rather, of making one's self loved, in which you are a little lacking. i can admit that at my age.you say that you are all attention, love, kisses and caresses for him. perhaps that is the very trouble; i think you kiss him too much.my dear, we have in our hands the most terrible power in the world: love.man is gifted with physical strength, and he exercises force. woman is gifted with charm, and she rules with caresses. it is our weapon, formidable and invincible, but we should know how to use it.know well that we are the mistresses of the world! to tell the history of love from the beginning of the world would be to tell the history of man himself: everything springs from it, the arts, great events, customs, wars, the overthrow of empires.in the bible you find delila, judith; in fables we find omphale, helen; in history the sabines, cleopatra and many others.therefore we reign supreme, all-powerful. but, like kings, we must make use of delicate diplomacy.love, my dear, is made up of imperceptible sensations. we know that it is as strong as death, but also as frail as glass. the slightest shock breaks it, and our power crumbles, and we are never able to raise it again.we have the power of making ourselves adored, but we lack one tiny thing, the understanding of the various kinds of caresses. in embraces we lose the sentiment of delicacy, while the man over whom we rule remains master of himself, capable of judging the foolishness of certain words. take care, my dear; that is the defect in our armor. it is our achilles' heel.do you know whence comes our real power? from the kiss, the kiss alone! when we know how to hold out and give up our lips we can become queens.the kiss is only a preface, however, but a charming preface. more charming than the realization itself. a preface which can always be read over again, whereas one cannot always read over the book.yes, the meeting of lips is the most perfect, the most divine sensation given to human beings, the supreme limit of happiness: it is in the kiss alone that one sometimes seems to feel this union of souls after which we strive, the intermingling of hearts, as it were.do you remember the verses of sully-prudhomme:caresses are nothing but anxious bliss,  vain attempts of love to unite souls through a kiss.one caress alone gives this deep sensation of two beings welded into one --it is the kiss. no violent delirium of complete possession is worth this trembling approach of the lips, this first moist and fresh contact, and then the long, lingering, motionless rapture.therefore, my dear, the kiss is our strongest weapon, but we must take care not to dull it. do not forget that its value is only relative, purely conventional. it continually changes according to circumstances, the state of expectancy and the ecstasy of the mind. i will call attention to one example.another poet, francois coppee, has written a line which we all remember, a line which we find delightful, which moves our very hearts.after describing the expectancy of a lover, waiting in a room one winter's evening, his anxiety, his nervous impatience, the terrible fear of not seeing her, he describes the arrival of the beloved woman, who at last enters hurriedly, out of breath, bringing with her part of the winter breeze, and he exclaims:oh! the taste of the kisses first snatched through the veil.is that not a line of exquisite sentiment, a delicate and charming observation, a perfect truth? all those who have hastened to a clandestine meeting, whom passion has thrown into the arms of a man, well do they know these first delicious kisses through the veil; and they tremble at the memory of them. and yet their sole charm lies in the circumstances, from being late, from the anxious expectancy, but from the purely--or, rather, impurely, if you prefer--sensual point of view, they are detestable.think! outside it is cold. the young woman has walked quickly; the veil is moist from her cold breath. little drops of water shine in the lace. the lover seizes her and presses his burning lips to her liquid breath. the moist veil, which discolors and carries the dreadful odor of chemical dye, penetrates into the young man's mouth, moistens his mustache. he does not taste the lips of his beloved, he tastes the dye of this lace moistened with cold breath. and yet, like the poet, we would all exclaim:oh! the taste of the kisses first snatched through the veil.therefore, the value of this caress being entirely a matter of convention, we must be careful not to abuse it.well, my dear, i have several times noticed that you are very clumsy. however, you were not alone in that fault; the majority of women lose their authority by abusing the kiss with untimely kisses. when they feel that their husband or their lover is a little tired, at those times when the heart as well as the body needs rest, instead of understanding what is going on within him, they persist in giving inopportune caresses, tire him by the obstinacy of begging lips and give caresses lavished with neither rhyme nor reason.trust in the advice of my experience. first, never kiss your husband in public, in the train, at the restaurant. it is bad taste; do not give in to your desires. he would feel ridiculous and would never forgive you.beware of useless kisses lavished in intimacy. i am sure that you abuse them. for instance, i remember one day that you did something quite shocking. probably you do not remember it.all three of us were together in the drawing-room, and, as you did not stand on ceremony before me, your husband was holding you on his knees and kissing you at great length on the neck, the lips and throat. suddenly you exclaimed: "oh! the fire!" you had been paying no attention to it, and it was almost out. a few lingering embers were glowing on the hearth. then he rose, ran to the woodbox, from which he dragged two enormous logs with great difficulty, when you came to him with begging lips, murmuring:"kiss me!" he turned his head with difficulty and tried to hold up the logs at the same time. then you gently and slowly placed your mouth on that of the poor fellow, who remained with his neck out of joint, his sides twisted, his arms almost dropping off, trembling with fatigue and tired from his desperate effort. and you kept drawing out this torturing kiss, without seeing or understanding. then when you freed him, you began to grumble: "how badly you kiss!" no wonder!oh, take care of that! we all have this foolish habit, this unconscious need of choosing the most inconvenient moments. when he is carrying a glass of water, when he is putting on his shoes, when he is tying his scarf--in short, when he finds himself in any uncomfortable position-- then is the time which we choose for a caress which makes him stop for a whole minute in the middle of a gesture with the sole desire of getting rid of us!do not think that this criticism is insignificant. love, my dear, is a delicate thing. the least little thing offends it; know that everything depends on the tact of our caresses. an ill-placed kiss may do any amount of harm.try following my advice.your old aunt,  collette.i was sitting on the pier of the small port of obernon, near the village of salis, looking at antibes, bathed in the setting sun. i had never before seen anything so wonderful and so beautiful.the small town, enclosed by its massive ramparts, built by monsieur de vauban, extended into the open sea, in the middle of the immense gulf of nice. the great waves, coming in from the ocean, broke at its feet, surrounding it with a wreath of foam; and beyond the ramparts the houses climbed up the hill, one after the other, as far as the two towers, which rose up into the sky, like the peaks of an ancient helmet. and these two towers were outlined against the milky whiteness of the alps, that enormous distant wall of snow which enclosed the entire horizon.between the white foam at the foot of the walls and the white snow on the sky-line the little city, dazzling against the bluish background of the nearest mountain ranges, presented to the rays of the setting sun a pyramid of red-roofed houses, whose facades were also white, but so different one from another that they seemed to be of all tints.and the sky above the alps was itself of a blue that was almost white, as if the snow had tinted it; some silvery clouds were floating just over the pale summits, and on the other side of the gulf nice, lying close to the water, stretched like a white thread between the sea and the mountain. two great sails, driven by a strong breeze, seemed to skim over the waves. i looked upon all this, astounded.this view was one of those sweet, rare, delightful things that seem to permeate you and are unforgettable, like the memory of a great happiness. one sees, thinks, suffers, is moved and loves with the eyes. he who can feel with the eye experiences the same keen, exquisite and deep pleasure in looking at men and things as the man with the delicate and sensitive ear, whose soul music overwhelms.i turned to my companion, m. martini, a pureblooded southerner."this is certainly one of the rarest sights which it has been vouchsafed to me to admire."i have seen mont saint-michel, that monstrous granite jewel, rise out of the sand at sunrise."i have seen, in the sahara, lake raianechergui, fifty kilometers long, shining under a moon as brilliant as our sun and breathing up toward it a white cloud, like a mist of milk."i have seen, in the lipari islands, the weird sulphur crater of the volcanello, a giant flower which smokes and burns, an enormous yellow flower, opening out in the midst of the sea, whose stem is a volcano."but i have seen nothing more wonderful than antibes, standing against the alps in the setting sun."and i know not how it is that memories of antiquity haunt me; verses of homer come into my mind; this is a city of the ancient east, a city of the odyssey; this is troy, although troy was very far from the sea."m. martini drew the sarty guide-book out of his pocket and read: "this city was originally a colony founded by the phocians of marseilles, about 340 b.c. they gave it the greek name of antipolis, meaning counter-city, city opposite another, because it is in fact opposite to nice, another colony from marseilles."after the gauls were conquered, the romans turned antibes into a municipal city, its inhabitants receiving the rights of roman citizenship."we know by an epigram of martial that at this time--"i interrupted him:"i don't care what she was. i tell you that i see down there a city of the odyssey. the coast of asia and the coast of europe resemble each other in their shores, and there is no city on the other coast of the mediterranean which awakens in me the memories of the heroic age as this one does."a footstep caused me to turn my head; a woman, a large, dark woman, was walking along the road which skirts the sea in going to the cape."that is madame parisse, you know," muttered monsieur martini, dwelling on the final syllable.no, i did not know, but that name, mentioned carelessly, that name of the trojan shepherd, confirmed me in my dream.however, i asked: "who is this madame parisse?"he seemed astonished that i did not know the story.i assured him that i did not know it, and i looked after the woman, who passed by without seeing us, dreaming, walking with steady and slow step, as doubtless the ladies of old walked.she was perhaps thirty-five years old and still very beautiful, though a trifle stout.and monsieur martini told me the following story:mademoiselle combelombe was married, one year before the war of 1870, to monsieur parisse, a government official. she was then a handsome young girl, as slender and lively as she has now become stout and sad.unwillingly she had accepted monsieur parisse, one of those little fat men with short legs, who trip along, with trousers that are always too large.after the war antibes was garrisoned by a single battalion commanded by monsieur jean de carmelin, a young officer decorated during the war, and who had just received his four stripes.as he found life exceedingly tedious in this fortress this stuffy mole-hole enclosed by its enormous double walls, he often strolled out to the cape, a kind of park or pine wood shaken by all the winds from the sea.there he met madame parisse, who also came out in the summer evenings to get the fresh air under the trees. how did they come to love each other? who knows? they met, they looked at each other, and when out of sight they doubtless thought of each other. the image of the young woman with the brown eyes, the black hair, the pale skin, this fresh, handsome southerner, who displayed her teeth in smiling, floated before the eyes of the officer as he continued his promenade, chewing his cigar instead of smoking it; and the image of the commanding officer, in his close-fitting coat, covered with gold lace, and his red trousers, and a little blond mustache, would pass before the eyes of madame parisse, when her husband, half shaven and ill-clad, short-legged and big-bellied, came home to supper in the evening.as they met so often, they perhaps smiled at the next meeting; then, seeing each other again and again, they felt as if they knew each other. he certainly bowed to her. and she, surprised, bowed in return, but very, very slightly, just enough not to appear impolite. but after two weeks she returned his salutation from a distance, even before they were side by side.he spoke to her. of what? doubtless of the setting sun. they admired it together, looking for it in each other's eyes more often than on the horizon. and every evening for two weeks this was the commonplace and persistent pretext for a few minutes' chat.then they ventured to take a few steps together, talking of anything that came into their minds, but their eyes were already saying to each other a thousand more intimate things, those secret, charming things that are reflected in the gentle emotion of the glance, and that cause the heart to beat, for they are a better revelation of the soul than the spoken word.and then he would take her hand, murmuring those words which the woman divines, without seeming to hear them.and it was agreed between them that they would love each other without evidencing it by anything sensual or brutal.she would have remained indefinitely at this stage of intimacy, but he wanted more. and every day he urged her more hotly to give in to his ardent desire.she resisted, would not hear of it, seemed determined not to give way.but one evening she said to him casually: "my husband has just gone to marseilles. he will be away four days."jean de carmelin threw himself at her feet, imploring her to open her door to him that very night at eleven o'clock. but she would not listen to him, and went home, appearing to be annoyed.the commandant was in a bad humor all the evening, and the next morning at dawn he went out on the ramparts in a rage, going from one exercise field to the other, dealing out punishment to the officers and men as one might fling stones into a crowd.on going in to breakfast he found an envelope under his napkin with these four words: "to-night at ten." and he gave one hundred sous without any reason to the waiter.the day seemed endless to him. he passed part of it in curling his hair and perfuming himself.as he was sitting down to the dinner-table another envelope was handed to him, and in it he found the following telegram:"my love: business completed.  i return this evening on the nine o'clock train.parisse."the commandant let loose such a vehement oath that the waiter dropped the soup-tureen on the floor.what should he do? he certainly wanted her, that very, evening at whatever cost; and he would have her. he would resort to any means, even to arresting and imprisoning the husband. then a mad thought struck him. calling for paper, he wrote the following note:madame: he will not come back this evening, i swear it to you,--and i shall be, you know where, at ten o'clock.  fear nothing.  i will answer for everything, on my honor as an officer. jean de carmelin.and having sent off this letter, he quietly ate his dinner.toward eight o'clock he sent for captain gribois, the second in command, and said, rolling between his fingers the crumpled telegram of monsieur parisse:"captain, i have just received a telegram of a very singular nature, which it is impossible for me to communicate to you. you will immediately have all the gates of the city closed and guarded, so that no one, mind me, no one, will either enter or leave before six in the morning. you will also have men patrol the streets, who will compel the inhabitants to retire to their houses at nine o'clock. any one found outside beyond that time will be conducted to his home 'manu militari'. if your men meet me this night they will at once go out of my way, appearing not to know me. you understand me?""yes, commandant.""i hold you responsible for the execution of my orders, my dear captain.""yes, commandant.""would you like to have a glass of chartreuse?""with great pleasure, commandant."they clinked glasses drank down the brown liquor and captain gribois left the room.the train from marseilles arrived at the station at nine o'clock sharp, left two passengers on the platform and went on toward nice.one of them, tall and thin, was monsieur saribe, the oil merchant, and the other, short and fat, was monsieur parisse.together they set out, with their valises, to reach the city, one kilometer distant.but on arriving at the gate of the port the guards crossed their bayonets, commanding them to retire.frightened, surprised, cowed with astonishment, they retired to deliberate; then, after having taken counsel one with the other, they came back cautiously to parley, giving their names.but the soldiers evidently had strict orders, for they threatened to shoot; and the two scared travellers ran off, throwing away their valises, which impeded their flight.making the tour of the ramparts, they presented themselves at the gate on the route to cannes. this likewise was closed and guarded by a menacing sentinel. messrs. saribe and parisse, like the prudent men they were, desisted from their efforts and went back to the station for shelter, since it was not safe to be near the fortifications after sundown.the station agent, surprised and sleepy, permitted them to stay till morning in the waiting-room.and they sat there side by side, in the dark, on the green velvet sofa, too scared to think of sleeping.it was a long and weary night for them.at half-past six in the morning they were informed that the gates were open and that people could now enter antibes.they set out for the city, but failed to find their abandoned valises on the road.when they passed through the gates of the city, still somewhat anxious, the commandant de carmelin, with sly glance and mustache curled up, came himself to look at them and question them.then he bowed to them politely, excusing himself for having caused them a bad night. but he had to carry out orders.the people of antibes were scared to death. some spoke of a surprise planned by the italians, others of the landing of the prince imperial and others again believed that there was an orleanist conspiracy. the truth was suspected only later, when it became known that the battalion of the commandant had been sent away, to a distance and that monsieur de carmelin had been severely punished.monsieur martini had finished his story. madame parisse returned, her promenade being ended. she passed gravely near me, with her eyes fixed on the alps, whose summits now gleamed rosy in the last rays of the setting sun.i longed to speak to her, this poor, sad woman, who would ever be thinking of that night of love, now long past, and of the bold man who for the sake of a kiss from her had dared to put a city into a state of siege and to compromise his whole future.and to-day he had probably forgotten her, if he did not relate this audacious, comical and tender farce to his comrades over their cups.had she seen him again? did she still love him? and i thought: here is an instance of modern love, grotesque and yet heroic. the homer who should sing of this new helen and the adventure of her menelaus must be gifted with the soul of a paul de kock. and yet the hero of this deserted woman was brave, daring, handsome, strong as achilles and more cunning than ulysses.major graf von farlsberg, the prussian commandant, was reading his newspaper as he lay back in a great easy-chair, with his booted feet on the beautiful marble mantelpiece where his spurs had made two holes, which had grown deeper every day during the three months that he had been in the chateau of uville.a cup of coffee was smoking on a small inlaid table, which was stained with liqueur, burned by cigars, notched by the penknife of the victorious officer, who occasionally would stop while sharpening a pencil, to jot down figures, or to make a drawing on it, just as it took his fancy.when he had read his letters and the german newspapers, which his orderly had brought him, he got up, and after throwing three or four enormous pieces of green wood on the fire, for these gentlemen were gradually cutting down the park in order to keep themselves warm, he went to the window. the rain was descending in torrents, a regular normandy rain, which looked as if it were being poured out by some furious person, a slanting rain, opaque as a curtain, which formed a kind of wall with diagonal stripes, and which deluged everything, a rain such as one frequently experiences in the neighborhood of rouen, which is the watering-pot of france.for a long time the officer looked at the sodden turf and at the swollen andelle beyond it, which was overflowing its banks; he was drumming a waltz with his fingers on the window-panes, when a noise made him turn round. it was his second in command, captain baron van kelweinstein.the major was a giant, with broad shoulders and a long, fan-like beard, which hung down like a curtain to his chest. his whole solemn person suggested the idea of a military peacock, a peacock who was carrying his tail spread out on his breast. he had cold, gentle blue eyes, and a scar from a swordcut, which he had received in the war with austria; he was said to be an honorable man, as well as a brave officer.the captain, a short, red-faced man, was tightly belted in at the waist, his red hair was cropped quite close to his head, and in certain lights he almost looked as if he had been rubbed over with phosphorus. he had lost two front teeth one night, though he could not quite remember how, and this sometimes made him speak unintelligibly, and he had a bald patch on top of his head surrounded by a fringe of curly, bright golden hair, which made him look like a monk.the commandant shook hands with him and drank his cup of coffee (the sixth that morning), while he listened to his subordinate's report of what had occurred; and then they both went to the window and declared that it was a very unpleasant outlook. the major, who was a quiet man, with a wife at home, could accommodate himself to everything; but the captain, who led a fast life, who was in the habit of frequenting low resorts, and enjoying women's society, was angry at having to be shut up for three months in that wretched hole.there was a knock at the door, and when the commandant said, "come in," one of the orderlies appeared, and by his mere presence announced that breakfast was ready. in the dining-room they met three other officers of lower rank--a lieutenant, otto von grossling, and two sub-lieutenants, fritz scheuneberg and baron von eyrick, a very short, fair-haired man, who was proud and brutal toward men, harsh toward prisoners and as explosive as gunpowder.since he had been in france his comrades had called him nothing but mademoiselle fifi. they had given him that nickname on account of his dandified style and small waist, which looked as if he wore corsets; of his pale face, on which his budding mustache scarcely showed, and on account of the habit he had acquired of employing the french expression, 'fi, fi donc', which he pronounced with a slight whistle when he wished to express his sovereign contempt for persons or things.the dining-room of the chateau was a magnificent long room, whose fine old mirrors, that were cracked by pistol bullets, and whose flemish tapestry, which was cut to ribbons, and hanging in rags in places from sword-cuts, told too well what mademoiselle fifi's occupation was during his spare time.there were three family portraits on the walls a steel-clad knight, a cardinal and a judge, who were all smoking long porcelain pipes, which had been inserted into holes in the canvas, while a lady in a long, pointed waist proudly exhibited a pair of enormous mustaches, drawn with charcoal. the officers ate their breakfast almost in silence in that mutilated room, which looked dull in the rain and melancholy in its dilapidated condition, although its old oak floor had become as solid as the stone floor of an inn.when they had finished eating and were smoking and drinking, they began, as usual, to berate the dull life they were leading. the bottles of brandy and of liqueur passed from hand to hand, and all sat back in their chairs and took repeated sips from their glasses, scarcely removing from their mouths the long, curved stems, which terminated in china bowls, painted in a manner to delight a hottentot.as soon as their glasses were empty they filled them again, with a gesture of resigned weariness, but mademoiselle fifi emptied his every minute, and a soldier immediately gave him another. they were enveloped in a cloud of strong tobacco smoke, and seemed to be sunk in a state of drowsy, stupid intoxication, that condition of stupid intoxication of men who have nothing to do, when suddenly the baron sat up and said: "heavens! this cannot go on; we must think of something to do." and on hearing this, lieutenant otto and sub-lieutenant fritz, who preeminently possessed the serious, heavy german countenance, said: "what, captain?"he thought for a few moments and then replied: "what? why, we must get up some entertainment, if the commandant will allow us." "what sort of an entertainment, captain?" the major asked, taking his pipe out of his mouth. "i will arrange all that, commandant," the baron said. "i will send le devoir to rouen, and he will bring back some ladies. i know where they can be found, we will have supper here, as all the materials are at hand and; at least, we shall have a jolly evening."graf von farlsberg shrugged his shoulders with a smile: "you must surely be mad, my friend."but all the other officers had risen and surrounded their chief, saying: "let the captain have his way, commandant; it is terribly dull here." and the major ended by yielding. "very well," he replied, and the baron immediately sent for le devoir. he was an old non-commissioned officer, who had never been seen to smile, but who carried out all the orders of his superiors to the letter, no matter what they might be. he stood there, with an impassive face, while he received the baron's instructions, and then went out, and five minutes later a large military wagon, covered with tarpaulin, galloped off as fast as four horses could draw it in the pouring rain. the officers all seemed to awaken from their lethargy, their looks brightened,, and they began to talk.although it was raining as hard as ever, the major declared that it was not so dark, and lieutenant von grossling said with conviction that the sky was clearing up, while mademoiselle fifi did not seem to be able to keep still. he got up and sat down again, and his bright eyes seemed to be looking for something to destroy. suddenly, looking at the lady with the mustaches, the young fellow pulled out his revolver and said: "you shall not see it." and without leaving his seat he aimed, and with two successive bullets cut out both the eyes of the portrait."let us make a mine!" he then exclaimed, and the conversation was suddenly interrupted, as if they had found some fresh and powerful subject of interest. the mine was his invention, his method of destruction, and his favorite amusement.when he left the chateau, the lawful owner, comte fernand d'amoys d'uville, had not had time to carry away or to hide anything except the plate, which had been stowed away in a hole made in one of the walls. as he was very rich and had good taste, the large drawing-room, which opened into the dining-room, looked like a gallery in a museum, before his precipitate flight.expensive oil paintings, water colors and drawings hung against the walls, while on the tables, on the hanging shelves and in elegant glass cupboards there were a thousand ornaments: small vases, statuettes, groups of dresden china and grotesque chinese figures, old ivory and venetian glass, which filled the large room with their costly and fantastic array.scarcely anything was left now; not that the things had been stolen, for the major would not have allowed that, but mademoiselle fifi would every now and then have a mine, and on those occasions all the officers thoroughly enjoyed themselves for five minutes. the little marquis went into the drawing-room to get what he wanted, and he brought back a small, delicate china teapot, which he filled with gunpowder, and carefully introduced a piece of punk through the spout. this he lighted and took his infernal machine into the next room, but he came back immediately and shut the door. the germans all stood expectant, their faces full of childish, smiling curiosity, and as soon as the explosion had shaken the chateau, they all rushed in at once.mademoiselle fifi, who got in first, clapped his hands in delight at the sight of a terra-cotta venus, whose head had been blown off, and each picked up pieces of porcelain and wondered at the strange shape of the fragments, while the major was looking with a paternal eye at the large drawing-room, which had been wrecked after the fashion of a nero, and was strewn with the fragments of works of art. he went out first and said with a smile: "that was a great success this time."but there was such a cloud of smoke in the dining-room, mingled with the tobacco smoke, that they could not breathe, so the commandant opened the window, and all the officers, who had returned for a last glass of cognac, went up to it.the moist air blew into the room, bringing with it a sort of powdery spray, which sprinkled their beards. they looked at the tall trees which were dripping with rain, at the broad valley which was covered with mist, and at the church spire in the distance, which rose up like a gray point in the beating rain.the bells had not rung since their arrival. that was the only resistance which the invaders had met with in the neighborhood. the parish priest had not refused to take in and to feed the prussian soldiers; he had several times even drunk a bottle of beer or claret with the hostile commandant, who often employed him as a benevolent intermediary; but it was no use to ask him for a single stroke of the bells; he would sooner have allowed himself to be shot. that was his way of protesting against the invasion, a peaceful and silent protest, the only one, he said, which was suitable to a priest, who was a man of mildness, and not of blood; and every one, for twenty-five miles round, praised abbe chantavoine's firmness and heroism in venturing to proclaim the public mourning by the obstinate silence of his church bells.the whole village, enthusiastic at his resistance, was ready to back up their pastor and to risk anything, for they looked upon that silent protest as the safeguard of the national honor. it seemed to the peasants that thus they deserved better of their country than belfort and strassburg, that they had set an equally valuable example, and that the name of their little village would become immortalized by that; but, with that exception, they refused their prussian conquerors nothing.the commandant and his officers laughed among themselves at this inoffensive courage, and as the people in the whole country round showed themselves obliging and compliant toward them, they willingly tolerated their silent patriotism. little baron wilhelm alone would have liked to have forced them to ring the bells. he was very angry at his superior's politic compliance with the priest's scruples, and every day begged the commandant to allow him to sound "ding-dong, ding-dong," just once, only just once, just by way of a joke. and he asked it in the coaxing, tender voice of some loved woman who is bent on obtaining her wish, but the commandant would not yield, and to console himself, mademoiselle fifi made a mine in the chateau d'uville.the five men stood there together for five minutes, breathing in the moist air, and at last lieutenant fritz said with a laugh: "the ladies will certainly not have fine weather for their drive. then they separated, each to his duty, while the captain had plenty to do in arranging for the dinner.when they met again toward evening they began to laugh at seeing each other as spick and span and smart as on the day of a grand review. the commandant's hair did not look so gray as it was in the morning, and the captain had shaved, leaving only his mustache, which made him look as if he had a streak of fire under his nose.in spite of the rain, they left the window open, and one of them went to listen from time to time; and at a quarter past six the baron said he heard a rumbling in the distance. they all rushed down, and presently the wagon drove up at a gallop with its four horses steaming and blowing, and splashed with mud to their girths. five women dismounted, five handsome girls whom a comrade of the captain, to whom le devoir had presented his card, had selected with care.they had not required much pressing, as they had got to know the prussians in the three months during which they had had to do with them, and so they resigned themselves to the men as they did to the state of affairs.they went at once into the dining-room, which looked still more dismal in its dilapidated condition when it was lighted up; while the table covered with choice dishes, the beautiful china and glass, and the plate, which had been found in the hole in the wall where its owner had hidden it, gave it the appearance of a bandits' inn, where they were supping after committing a robbery in the place. the captain was radiant, and put his arm round the women as if he were familiar with them; and when the three young men wanted to appropriate one each, he opposed them authoritatively, reserving to himself the right to apportion them justly, according to their several ranks, so as not to offend the higher powers. therefore, to avoid all discussion, jarring, and suspicion of partiality, he placed them all in a row according to height, and addressing the tallest, he said in a voice of command:"what is your name?" "pamela," she replied, raising her voice. and then he said: "number one, called pamela, is adjudged to the commandant." then, having kissed blondina, the second, as a sign of proprietorship, he proffered stout amanda to lieutenant otto; eva, "the tomato," to sub- lieutenant fritz, and rachel, the shortest of them all, a very young, dark girl, with eyes as black as ink, a jewess, whose snub nose proved the rule which allots hooked noses to all her race, to the youngest officer, frail count wilhelm d'eyrick.they were all pretty and plump, without any distinctive features, and all had a similarity of complexion and figure.the three young men wished to carry off their prizes immediately, under the pretext that they might wish to freshen their toilets; but the captain wisely opposed this, for he said they were quite fit to sit down to dinner, and his experience in such matters carried the day. there were only many kisses, expectant kisses.suddenly rachel choked, and began to cough until the tears came into her eyes, while smoke came through her nostrils. under pretence of kissing her, the count had blown a whiff of tobacco into her mouth. she did not fly into a rage and did not say a word, but she looked at her tormentor with latent hatred in her dark eyes.they sat down to dinner. the commandant seemed delighted; he made pamela sit on his right, and blondina on his left, and said, as he unfolded his table napkin: "that was a delightful idea of yours, captain."lieutenants otto and fritz, who were as polite as if they had been with fashionable ladies, rather intimidated their guests, but baron von kelweinstein beamed, made obscene remarks and seemed on fire with his crown of red hair. he paid the women compliments in french of the rhine, and sputtered out gallant remarks, only fit for a low pothouse, from between his two broken teeth.they did not understand him, however, and their intelligence did not seem to be awakened until he uttered foul words and broad expressions, which were mangled by his accent. then they all began to laugh at once like crazy women and fell against each other, repeating the words, which the baron then began to say all wrong, in order that he might have the pleasure of hearing them say dirty things. they gave him as much of that stuff as he wanted, for they were drunk after the first bottle of wine, and resuming their usual habits and manners, they kissed the officers to right and left of them, pinched their arms, uttered wild cries, drank out of every glass and sang french couplets and bits of german songs which they had picked up in their daily intercourse with the enemy.soon the men themselves became very unrestrained, shouted and broke the plates and dishes, while the soldiers behind them waited on them stolidly. the commandant was the only one who kept any restraint upon himself.mademoiselle fifi had taken rachel on his knee, and, getting excited, at one moment he kissed the little black curls on her neck and at another he pinched her furiously and made her scream, for he was seized by a species of ferocity, and tormented by his desire to hurt her. he often held her close to him and pressed a long kiss on the jewess' rosy mouth until she lost her breath, and at last he bit her until a stream of blood ran down her chin and on to her bodice.for the second time she looked him full in the face, and as she bathed the wound, she said: "you will have to pay for, that!" but he merely laughed a hard laugh and said: "i will pay."at dessert champagne was served, and the commandant rose, and in the same voice in which he would have drunk to the health of the empress augusta, he drank: "to our ladies!" and a series of toasts began, toasts worthy of the lowest soldiers and of drunkards, mingled with obscene jokes, which were made still more brutal by their ignorance of the language. they got up, one after the other, trying to say something witty, forcing themselves to be funny, and the women, who were so drunk that they almost fell off their chairs, with vacant looks and clammy tongues applauded madly each time.the captain, who no doubt wished to impart an appearance of gallantry to the orgy, raised his glass again and said: "to our victories over hearts and, thereupon lieutenant otto, who was a species of bear from the black forest, jumped up, inflamed and saturated with drink, and suddenly seized by an access of alcoholic patriotism, he cried: "to our victories over france!"drunk as they were, the women were silent, but rachel turned round, trembling, and said: "see here, i know some frenchmen in whose presence you would not dare say that." but the little count, still holding her on his knee, began to laugh, for the wine had made him very merry, and said: "ha! ha! ha! i have never met any of them myself. as soon as we show ourselves, they run away!" the girl, who was in a terrible rage, shouted into his face: "you are lying, you dirty scoundrel!"for a moment he looked at her steadily with his bright eyes upon her, as he had looked at the portrait before he destroyed it with bullets from his revolver, and then he began to laugh: "ah! yes, talk about them, my dear! should we be here now if they were brave?" and, getting excited, he exclaimed: "we are the masters! france belongs to us!" she made one spring from his knee and threw herself into her chair, while he arose, held out his glass over the table and repeated: "france and the french, the woods, the fields and the houses of france belong to us!"the others, who were quite drunk, and who were suddenly seized by military enthusiasm, the enthusiasm of brutes, seized their glasses, and shouting, "long live prussia!" they emptied them at a draught.the girls did not protest, for they were reduced to silence and were afraid. even rachel did not say a word, as she had no reply to make. then the little marquis put his champagne glass, which had just been refilled, on the head of the jewess and exclaimed: "all the women in france belong to us also!"at that she got up so quickly that the glass upset, spilling the amber-colored wine on her black hair as if to baptize her, and broke into a hundred fragments, as it fell to the floor. her lips trembling, she defied the looks of the officer, who was still laughing, and stammered out in a voice choked with rage:"that--that--that--is not true--for you shall not have the women of france!"he sat down again so as to laugh at his ease; and, trying to speak with the parisian accent, he said: "she is good, very good! then why did you come here, my dear?" she was thunderstruck and made no reply for a moment, for in her agitation she did not understand him at first, but as soon as she grasped his meaning she said to him indignantly and vehemently: "i! i! i am not a woman, i am only a strumpet, and that is all that prussians want."almost before she had finished he slapped her full in the face; but as he was raising his hand again, as if to strike her, she seized a small dessert knife with a silver blade from the table and, almost mad with rage, stabbed him right in the hollow of his neck. something that he was going to say was cut short in his throat, and he sat there with his mouth half open and a terrible look in his eyes.all the officers shouted in horror and leaped up tumultuously; but, throwing her chair between the legs of lieutenant otto, who fell down at full length, she ran to the window, opened it before they could seize her and jumped out into the night and the pouring rain.in two minutes mademoiselle fifi was dead, and fritz and otto drew their swords and wanted to kill the women, who threw themselves at their feet and clung to their knees. with some difficulty the major stopped the slaughter and had the four terrified girls locked up in a room under the care of two soldiers, and then he organized the pursuit of the fugitive as carefully as if he were about to engage in a skirmish, feeling quite sure that she would be caught.the table, which had been cleared immediately, now served as a bed on which to lay out the lieutenant, and the four officers stood at the windows, rigid and sobered with the stern faces of soldiers on duty, and tried to pierce through the darkness of the night amid the steady torrent of rain. suddenly a shot was heard and then another, a long way off; and for four hours they heard from time to time near or distant reports and rallying cries, strange words of challenge, uttered in guttural voices.in the morning they all returned. two soldiers had been killed and three others wounded by their comrades in the ardor of that chase and in the confusion of that nocturnal pursuit, but they had not caught rachel.then the inhabitants of the district were terrorized, the houses were turned topsy-turvy, the country was scoured and beaten up, over and over again, but the jewess did not seem to have left a single trace of her passage behind her.when the general was told of it he gave orders to hush up the affair, so as not to set a bad example to the army, but he severely censured the commandant, who in turn punished his inferiors. the general had said: "one does not go to war in order to amuse one's self and to caress prostitutes." graf von farlsberg, in his exasperation, made up his mind to have his revenge on the district, but as he required a pretext for showing severity, he sent for the priest and ordered him to have the bell tolled at the funeral of baron von eyrick.contrary to all expectation, the priest showed himself humble and most respectful, and when mademoiselle fifi's body left the chateau d'uville on its way to the cemetery, carried by soldiers, preceded, surrounded and followed by soldiers who marched with loaded rifles, for the first time the bell sounded its funeral knell in a lively manner, as if a friendly hand were caressing it. at night it rang again, and the next day, and every day; it rang as much as any one could desire. sometimes even it would start at night and sound gently through the darkness, seized with a strange joy, awakened one could not tell why. all the peasants in the neighborhood declared that it was bewitched, and nobody except the priest and the sacristan would now go near the church tower. and they went because a poor girl was living there in grief and solitude and provided for secretly by those two men.she remained there until the german troops departed, and then one evening the priest borrowed the baker's cart and himself drove his prisoner to rouen. when they got there he embraced her, and she quickly went back on foot to the establishment from which she had come, where the proprietress, who thought that she was dead, was very glad to see her.a short time afterward a patriot who had no prejudices, and who liked her because of her bold deed, and who afterward loved her for herself, married her and made her a lady quite as good as many others.iwhat a strange idea it was for me to choose mademoiselle pearl for queen that evening!every year i celebrate twelfth night with my old friend chantal. my father, who was his most intimate friend, used to take me round there when i was a child. i continued the custom, and i doubtless shall continue it as long as i live and as long as there is a chantal in this world.the chantals lead a peculiar existence; they live in paris as though they were in grasse, evetot, or pont-a-mousson.they have a house with a little garden near the observatory. they live there as though they were in the country. of paris, the real paris, they know nothing at all, they suspect nothing; they are so far, so far away! however, from time to time, they take a trip into it. mademoiselle chantal goes to lay in her provisions, as it is called in the family. this is how they go to purchase their provisions:mademoiselle pearl, who has the keys to the kitchen closet (for the linen closets are administered by the mistress herself), mademoiselle pearl gives warning that the supply of sugar is low, that the preserves are giving out, that there is not much left in the bottom of the coffee bag. thus warned against famine, mademoiselle chantal passes everything in review, taking notes on a pad. then she puts down a lot of figures and goes through lengthy calculations and long discussions with mademoiselle pearl. at last they manage to agree, and they decide upon the quantity of each thing of which they will lay in a three months' provision; sugar, rice, prunes, coffee, preserves, cans of peas, beans, lobster, salt or smoked fish, etc., etc. after which the day for the purchasing is determined on and they go in a cab with a railing round the top and drive to a large grocery store on the other side of the river in the new sections of the town.madame chantal and mademoiselle pearl make this trip together, mysteriously, and only return at dinner time, tired out, although still excited, and shaken up by the cab, the roof of which is covered with bundles and bags, like an express wagon.for the chantals all that part of paris situated on the other side of the seine constitutes the new quarter, a section inhabited by a strange, noisy population, which cares little for honor, spends its days in dissipation, its nights in revelry, and which throws money out of the windows. from time to time, however, the young girls are taken to the opera-comique or the theatre francais, when the play is recommended by the paper which is read by m. chantal.at present the young ladies are respectively nineteen and seventeen. they are two pretty girls, tall and fresh, very well brought up, in fact, too well brought up, so much so that they pass by unperceived like two pretty dolls. never would the idea come to me to pay the slightest attention or to pay court to one of the young chantal ladies; they are so immaculate that one hardly dares speak to them; one almost feels indecent when bowing to them.as for the father, he is a charming man, well educated, frank, cordial, but he likes calm and quiet above all else, and has thus contributed greatly to the mummifying of his family in order to live as he pleased in stagnant quiescence. he reads a lot, loves to talk and is readily affected. lack of contact and of elbowing with the world has made his moral skin very tender and sensitive. the slightest thing moves him, excites him, and makes him suffer.the chantals have limited connections carefully chosen in the neighborhood. they also exchange two or three yearly visits with relatives who live in the distance.as for me, i take dinner with them on the fifteenth of august and on twelfth night. that is as much one of my duties as easter communion is for a catholic.on the fifteenth of august a few friends are invited, but on twelfth night i am the only stranger.well, this year, as every former year, i went to the chantals' for my epiphany dinner.according to my usual custom, i kissed m. chantal, madame chantal and mademoiselle pearl, and i made a deep bow to the misses louise and pauline. i was questioned about a thousand and one things, about what had happened on the boulevards, about politics, about how matters stood in tong-king, and about our representatives in parliament. madame chantal, a fat lady, whose ideas always gave me the impression of being carved out square like building stones, was accustomed to exclaiming at the end of every political discussion: "all that is seed which does not promise much for the future!" why have i always imagined that madame chantal's ideas are square? i don't know; but everything that she says takes that shape in my head: a big square, with four symmetrical angles. there are other people whose ideas always strike me as being round and rolling like a hoop. as soon as they begin a sentence on any subject it rolls on and on, coming out in ten, twenty, fifty round ideas, large and small, which i see rolling along, one behind the other, to the end of the horizon. other people have pointed ideas--but enough of this.we sat down as usual and finished our dinner without anything out of the ordinary being said. at dessert the twelfth night cake was brought on. now, m. chantal had been king every year. i don't know whether this was the result of continued chance or a family convention, but he unfailingly found the bean in his piece of cake, and he would proclaim madame chantal to be queen. therefore, i was greatly surprised to find something very hard, which almost made me break a tooth, in a mouthful of cake. gently i took this thing from my mouth and i saw that it was a little porcelain doll, no bigger than a bean. surprise caused me to exclaim:"ah!" all looked at me, and chantal clapped his hands and cried: "it's gaston! it's gaston! long live the king! long live the king!"all took up the chorus: "long live the king!" and i blushed to the tip of my ears, as one often does, without any reason at all, in situations which are a little foolish. i sat there looking at my plate, with this absurd little bit of pottery in my fingers, forcing myself to laugh and not knowing what to do or say, when chantal once more cried out: "now, you must choose a queen!"then i was thunderstruck. in a second a thousand thoughts and suppositions flashed through my mind. did they expect me to pick out one of the young chantal ladies? was that a trick to make me say which one i prefer? was it a gentle, light, direct hint of the parents toward a possible marriage? the idea of marriage roams continually in houses with grown-up girls, and takes every shape and disguise, and employs every subterfuge. a dread of compromising myself took hold of me as well as an extreme timidity before the obstinately correct and reserved attitude of the misses louise and pauline. to choose one of them in preference to the other seemed to me as difficult as choosing between two drops of water; and then the fear of launching myself into an affair which might, in spite of me, lead me gently into matrimonial ties, by means as wary and imperceptible and as calm as this insignificant royalty--the fear of all this haunted me.suddenly i had an inspiration, and i held out to mademoiselle pearl the symbolical emblem. at first every one was surprised, then they doubtless appreciated my delicacy and discretion, for they applauded furiously. everybody was crying: "long live the queen! long live the queen!"as for herself, poor old maid, she was so amazed that she completely lost control of herself; she was trembling and stammering: "no--no--oh! no-- not me--please--not me--i beg of you----"then for the first time in my life i looked at mademoiselle pearl and wondered what she was.i was accustomed to seeing her in this house, just as one sees old upholstered armchairs on which one has been sitting since childhood without ever noticing them. one day, with no reason at all, because a ray of sunshine happens to strike the seat, you suddenly think: "why, that chair is very curious"; and then you discover that the wood has been worked by a real artist and that the material is remarkable. i had never taken any notice of mademoiselle pearl.she was a part of the chantal family, that was all. but how? by what right? she was a tall, thin person who tried to remain in the background, but who was by no means insignificant. she was treated in a friendly manner, better than a housekeeper, not so well as a relative. i suddenly observed several shades of distinction which i had never noticed before. madame chantal said: "pearl." the young ladies: "mademoiselle pearl," and chantal only addressed her as "mademoiselle," with an air of greater respect, perhaps.i began to observe her. how old could she be? forty? yes, forty. she was not old, she made herself old. i was suddenly struck by this fact. she fixed her hair and dressed in a ridiculous manner, and, notwithstanding all that, she was not in the least ridiculous, she had such simple, natural gracefulness, veiled and hidden. truly, what a strange creature! how was it i had never observed her before? she dressed her hair in a grotesque manner with little old maid curls, most absurd; but beneath this one could see a large, calm brow, cut by two deep lines, two wrinkles of long sadness, then two blue eyes, large and tender, so timid, so bashful, so humble, two beautiful eyes which had kept the expression of naive wonder of a young girl, of youthful sensations, and also of sorrow, which had softened without spoiling them.her whole face was refined and discreet, a face the expression of which seemed to have gone out without being used up or faded by the fatigues and great emotions of life.what a dainty mouth! and such pretty teeth! but one would have thought that she did not dare smile.suddenly i compared her to madame chantal! undoubtedly mademoiselle pearl was the better of the two, a hundred times better, daintier, prouder, more noble. i was surprised at my observation. they were pouring out champagne. i held my glass up to the queen and, with a well- turned compliment, i drank to her health. i could see that she felt inclined to hide her head in her napkin. then, as she was dipping her lips in the clear wine, everybody cried: "the queen drinks! the queen drinks!" she almost turned purple and choked. everybody was laughing; but i could see that all loved her.as soon as dinner was over chantal took me by the arm. it was time for his cigar, a sacred hour. when alone he would smoke it out in the street; when guests came to dinner he would take them to the billiard room and smoke while playing. that evening they had built a fire to celebrate twelfth night; my old friend took his cue, a very fine one, and chalked it with great care; then he said:"you break, my boy!"he called me "my boy," although i was twenty-five, but he had known me as a young child.i started the game and made a few carroms. i missed some others, but as the thought of mademoiselle pearl kept returning to my mind, i suddenly asked:"by the way, monsieur chantal, is mademoiselle pearl a relative of yours?"greatly surprised, he stopped playing and looked at me:"what! don't you know? haven't you heard about mademoiselle pearl?""no.""didn't your father ever tell you?""no.""well, well, that's funny! that certainly is funny! why, it's a regular romance!"he paused, and then continued:"and if you only knew how peculiar it is that you should ask me that to- day, on twelfth night!""why?""why? well, listen. forty-one years ago to day, the day of the epiphany, the following events occurred: we were then living at roiiy-le-tors, on the ramparts; but in order that you may understand, i must first explain the house. roily is built on a hill, or, rather, on a mound which overlooks a great stretch of prairie. we had a house there with a beautiful hanging garden supported by the old battlemented wall; so that the house was in the town on the streets, while the garden overlooked the plain. there was a door leading from the garden to the open country, at the bottom of a secret stairway in the thick wall--the kind you read about in novels. a road passed in front of this door, which was provided with a big bell; for the peasants, in order to avoid the roundabout way, would bring their provisions up this way."you now understand the place, don't you? well, this year, at epiphany, it had been snowing for a week. one might have thought that the world was coming to an end. when we went to the ramparts to look over the plain, this immense white, frozen country, which shone like varnish, would chill our very souls. one might have thought that the lord had packed the world in cotton to put it away in the storeroom for old worlds. i can assure you that it was dreary looking."we were a very numerous family at that time my father, my mother, my uncle and aunt, my two brothers and four cousins; they were pretty little girls; i married the youngest. of all that crowd, there are only three of us left: my wife, i, and my sister-in-law, who lives in marseilles. zounds! how quickly a family like that dwindles away! i tremble when i think of it! i was fifteen years old then, since i am fifty-six now."we were going to celebrate the epiphany, and we were all happy, very happy! everybody was in the parlor, awaiting dinner, and my oldest brother, jacques, said: 'there has been a dog howling out in the plain for about ten minutes; the poor beast must be lost.'"he had hardly stopped talking when the garden bell began to ring. it had the deep sound of a church bell, which made one think of death. a shiver ran through everybody. my father called the servant and told him to go outside and look. we waited in complete silence; we were thinking of the snow which covered the ground. when the man returned he declared that he had seen nothing. the dog kept up its ceaseless howling, and always from the same spot."we sat down to dinner; but we were all uneasy, especially the young people. everything went well up to the roast, then the bell began to ring again, three times in succession, three heavy, long strokes which vibrated to the tips of our fingers and which stopped our conversation short. we sat there looking at each other, fork in the air, still listening, and shaken by a kind of supernatural fear."at last my mother spoke: 'it's surprising that they should have waited so long to come back. do not go alone, baptiste; one of these gentlemen will accompany you.'"my uncle francois arose. he was a kind of hercules, very proud of his strength, and feared nothing in the world. my father said to him: 'take a gun. there is no telling what it might be.'"but my uncle only took a cane and went out with the servant."we others remained there trembling with fear and apprehension, without eating or speaking. my father tried to reassure us: 'just wait and see,' he said; 'it will be some beggar or some traveller lost in the snow. after ringing once, seeing that the door was not immediately opened, he attempted again to find his way, and being unable to, he has returned to our door.'"our uncle seemed to stay away an hour. at last he came back, furious, swearing: 'nothing at all; it's some practical joker! there is nothing but that damned dog howling away at about a hundred yards from the walls. if i had taken a gun i would have killed him to make him keep quiet.'"we sat down to dinner again, but every one was excited; we felt that all was not over, that something was going to happen, that the bell would soon ring again."it rang just as the twelfth night cake was being cut. all the men jumped up together. my uncle, francois, who had been drinking champagne, swore so furiously that he would murder it, whatever it might be, that my mother and my aunt threw themselves on him to prevent his going. my father, although very calm and a little helpless (he limped ever since he had broken his leg when thrown by a horse), declared, in turn, that he wished to find out what was the matter and that he was going. my brothers, aged eighteen and twenty, ran to get their guns; and as no one was paying any attention to me i snatched up a little rifle that was used in the garden and got ready to accompany the expedition."it started out immediately. my father and uncle were walking ahead with baptiste, who was carrying a lantern. my brothers, jacques and paul, followed, and i trailed on behind in spite of the prayers of my mother, who stood in front of the house with her sister and my cousins."it had been snowing again for the last hour, and the trees were weighted down. the pines were bending under this heavy, white garment, and looked like white pyramids or enormous sugar cones, and through the gray curtains of small hurrying flakes could be seen the lighter bushes which stood out pale in the shadow. the snow was falling so thick that we could hardly see ten feet ahead of us. but the lantern threw a bright light around us. when we began to go down the winding stairway in the wall i really grew frightened. i felt as though some one were walking behind me, were going to grab me by the shoulders and carry me away, and i felt a strong desire to return; but, as i would have had to cross the garden all alone, i did not dare. i heard some one opening the door leading to the plain; my uncle began to swear again, exclaiming: 'by ---! he has gone again! if i can catch sight of even his shadow, i'll take care not to miss him, the swine!'"it was a discouraging thing to see this great expanse of plain, or, rather, to feel it before us, for we could not see it; we could only see a thick, endless veil of snow, above, below, opposite us, to the right, to the left, everywhere. my uncle continued:'listen! there is the dog howling again; i will teach him how i shoot. that will be something gained, anyhow.'"but my father, who was kind-hearted, went on:'it will be much better to go on and get the poor animal, who is crying for hunger. the poor fellow is barking for help; he is calling like a man in distress. let us go to him.'"so we started out through this mist, through this thick continuous fall of snow, which filled the air, which moved, floated, fell, and chilled the skin with a burning sensation like a sharp, rapid pain as each flake melted. we were sinking in up to our knees in this soft, cold mass, and we had to lift our feet very high in order to walk. as we advanced the dog's voice became clearer and stronger. my uncle cried: 'here he is!' we stopped to observe him as one does when he meets an enemy at night."i could see nothing, so i ran up to the others, and i caught sight of him; he was frightful and weird-looking; he was a big black shepherd's dog with long hair and a wolf's head, standing just within the gleam of light cast by our lantern on the snow. he did not move; he was silently watching us."my uncle said: 'that's peculiar, he is neither advancing nor retreating. i feel like taking a shot at him.'"my father answered in a firm voice: 'no, we must capture him.'"then my brother jacques added: 'but he is not alone. there is something behind him.""there was indeed something behind him, something gray, impossible to distinguish. we started out again cautiously. when he saw us approaching the dog sat down. he did not look wicked. instead, he seemed pleased at having been able to attract the attention of some one."my father went straight to him and petted him. the dog licked his hands. we saw that he was tied to the wheel of a little carriage, a sort of toy carriage entirely wrapped up in three or four woolen blankets. we carefully took off these coverings, and as baptiste approached his lantern to the front of this little vehicle, which looked like a rolling kennel, we saw in it a little baby sleeping peacefully."we were so astonished that we couldn't speak.my father was the first to collect his wits, and as he had a warm heart and a broad mind, he stretched his hand over the roof of the carriage and said: 'poor little waif, you shall be one of us!' and he ordered my brother jacques to roll the foundling ahead of us. thinking out loud, my father continued:"'some child of love whose poor mother rang at my door on this night of epiphany in memory of the child of god.'"he once more stopped and called at the top of his lungs through the night to the four corners of the heavens: 'we have found it!' then, putting his hand on his brother's shoulder, he murmured: 'what if you had shot the dog, francois?'"my uncle did not answer, but in the darkness he crossed himself, for, notwithstanding his blustering manner, he was very religious."the dog, which had been untied, was following us."ah! but you should have seen us when we got to the house! at first we had a lot of trouble in getting the carriage up through the winding stairway; but we succeeded and even rolled it into the vestibule."how funny mamma was! how happy and astonished! and my four little cousins (the youngest was only six), they looked like four chickens around a nest. at last we took the child from the carriage. it was still sleeping. it was a girl about six weeks old. in its clothes we found ten thousand francs in gold, yes, my boy, ten thousand francs!-- which papa saved for her dowry. therefore, it was not a child of poor people, but, perhaps, the child of some nobleman and a little bourgeoise of the town--or again--we made a thousand suppositions, but we never found out anything-never the slightest clue. the dog himself was recognized by no one. he was a stranger in the country. at any rate, the person who rang three times at our door must have known my parents well, to have chosen them thus."that is how, at the age of six weeks, mademoiselle pearl entered the chantal household."it was not until later that she was called mademoiselle pearl. she was at first baptized 'marie simonne claire,' claire being intended, for her family name."i can assure you that our return to the diningroom was amusing, with this baby now awake and looking round her at these people and these lights with her vague blue questioning eyes."we sat down to dinner again and the cake was cut. i was king, and for queen i took mademoiselle pearl, just as you did to-day. on that day she did not appreciate the honor that was being shown her."well, the child was adopted and brought up in the family. she grew, and the years flew by. she was so gentle and loving and minded so well that every one would have spoiled her abominably had not my mother prevented it."my mother was an orderly woman with a great respect for class distinctions. she consented to treat little claire as she did her own sons, but, nevertheless, she wished the distance which separated us to be well marked, and our positions well established. therefore, as soon as the child could understand, she acquainted her with her story and gently, even tenderly, impressed on the little one's mind that, for the chantals, she was an adopted daughter, taken in, but, nevertheless, a stranger. claire understood the situation with peculiar intelligence and with surprising instinct; she knew how to take the place which was allotted her, and to keep it with so much tact, gracefulness and gentleness that she often brought tears to my father's eyes. my mother herself was often moved by the passionate gratitude and timid devotion of this dainty and loving little creature that she began calling her: 'my daughter.' at times, when the little one had done something kind and good, my mother would raise her spectacles on her forehead, a thing which always indicated emotion with her, and she would repeat: 'this child is a pearl, a perfect pearl!' this name stuck to the little claire, who became and remained for us mademoiselle pearl."iim. chantal stopped. he was sitting on the edge of the billiard table, his feet hanging, and was playing with a ball with his left hand, while with his right he crumpled a rag which served to rub the chalk marks from the slate. a little red in the face, his voice thick, he was talking away to himself now, lost in his memories, gently drifting through the old scenes and events which awoke in his mind, just as we walk through old family gardens where we were brought up and where each tree, each walk, each hedge reminds us of some occurrence.i stood opposite him leaning against the wall, my hands resting on my idle cue.after a slight pause he continued:"by jove! she was pretty at eighteen--and graceful--and perfect. ah! she was so sweet--and good and true--and charming! she had such eyes- blue-transparent--clear--such eyes as i have never seen since!"he was once more silent. i asked: "why did she never marry?"he answered, not to me, but to the word "marry" which had caught his ear: "why? why? she never would--she never would! she had a dowry of thirty thousand francs, and she received several offers--but she never would! she seemed sad at that time. that was when i married my cousin, little charlotte, my wife, to whom i had been engaged for six years."i looked at m. chantal, and it seemed to me that i was looking into his very soul, and i was suddenly witnessing one of those humble and cruel tragedies of honest, straightforward, blameless hearts, one of those secret tragedies known to no one, not even the silent and resigned victims. a rash curiosity suddenly impelled me to exclaim:"you should have married her, monsieur chantal!"he started, looked at me, and said:"i? marry whom?""mademoiselle pearl.""why?""because you loved her more than your cousin."he stared at me with strange, round, bewildered eyes and stammered:"i loved her--i? how? who told you that?""why, anyone can see that--and it's even on account of her that you delayed for so long your marriage to your cousin who had been waiting for you for six years."he dropped the ball which he was holding in his left hand, and, seizing the chalk rag in both hands, he buried his face in it and began to sob. he was weeping with his eyes, nose and mouth in a heartbreaking yet ridiculous manner, like a sponge which one squeezes. he was coughing, spitting and blowing his nose in the chalk rag, wiping his eyes and sneezing; then the tears would again begin to flow down the wrinkles on his face and he would make a strange gurgling noise in his throat. i felt bewildered, ashamed; i wanted to run away, and i no longer knew what to say, do, or attempt.suddenly madame chantal's voice sounded on the stairs. "haven't you men almost finished smoking your cigars?"i opened the door and cried: "yes, madame, we are coming right down."then i rushed to her husband, and, seizing him by the shoulders, i cried: "monsieur chantal, my friend chantal, listen to me; your wife is calling; pull yourself together, we must go downstairs."he stammered: "yes--yes--i am coming--poor girl! i am coming--tell her that i am coming."he began conscientiously to wipe his face on the cloth which, for the last two or three years, had been used for marking off the chalk from the slate; then he appeared, half white and half red, his forehead, nose, cheeks and chin covered with chalk, and his eyes swollen, still full of tears.i caught him by the hands and dragged him into his bedroom, muttering: "i beg your pardon, i beg your pardon, monsieur chantal, for having caused you such sorrow--but--i did not know--you--you understand."he squeezed my hand, saying: "yes--yes--there are difficult moments."then he plunged his face into a bowl of water. when he emerged from it he did not yet seem to me to be presentable; but i thought of a little stratagem. as he was growing worried, looking at himself in the mirror, i said to him: "all you have to do is to say that a little dust flew into your eye and you can cry before everybody to your heart's content."he went downstairs rubbing his eyes with his handkerchief. all were worried; each one wished to look for the speck, which could not be found; and stories were told of similar cases where it had been necessary to call in a physician.i went over to mademoiselle pearl and watched her, tormented by an ardent curiosity, which was turning to positive suffering. she must indeed have been pretty, with her gentle, calm eyes, so large that it looked as though she never closed them like other mortals. her gown was a little ridiculous, a real old maid's gown, which was unbecoming without appearing clumsy.it seemed to me as though i were looking into her soul, just as i had into monsieur chantal's; that i was looking right from one end to the other of this humble life, so simple and devoted. i felt an irresistible longing to question her, to find out whether she, too, had loved him; whether she also had suffered, as he had, from this long, secret, poignant grief, which one cannot see, know, or guess, but which breaks forth at night in the loneliness of the dark room. i was watching her, and i could observe her heart beating under her waist, and i wondered whether this sweet, candid face had wept on the soft pillow and she had sobbed, her whole body shaken by the violence of her anguish.i said to her in a low voice, like a child who is breaking a toy to see what is inside: "if you could have seen monsieur chantal crying a while ago it would have moved you."she started, asking: "what? he was weeping?""ah, yes, he was indeed weeping!""why?"she seemed deeply moved. i answered:"on your account.""on my account?""yes. he was telling me how much he had loved you in the days gone by; and what a pang it had given him to marry his cousin instead of you."her pale face seemed to grow a little longer; her calm eyes, which always remained open, suddenly closed so quickly that they seemed shut forever. she slipped from her chair to the floor, and slowly, gently sank down as would a fallen garment.i cried: "help! help! mademoiselle pearl is ill."madame chantal and her daughters rushed forward, and while they were looking for towels, water and vinegar, i grabbed my hat and ran away.i walked away with rapid strides, my heart heavy, my mind full of remorse and regret. and yet sometimes i felt pleased; i felt as though i had done a praiseworthy and necessary act. i was asking myself: "did i do wrong or right?" they had that shut up in their hearts, just as some people carry a bullet in a closed wound. will they not be happier now? it was too late for their torture to begin over again and early enough for them to remember it with tenderness.and perhaps some evening next spring, moved by a beam of moonlight falling through the branches on the grass at their feet, they will join and press their hands in memory of all this cruel and suppressed suffering; and, perhaps, also this short embrace may infuse in their veins a little of this thrill which they would not have known without it, and will give to those two dead souls, brought to life in a second, the rapid and divine sensation of this intoxication, of this madness which gives to lovers more happiness in an instant than other men can gather during a whole lifetime!roger de tourneville was whiffing a cigar and blowing out small clouds of smoke every now and then, as he sat astride a chair amid a party of friends. he was talking."we were at dinner when a letter was brought in which my father opened. you know my father, who thinks that he is king of france ad interim. i call him don quixote, because for twelve years he has been running a tilt against the windmill of the republic, without quite knowing whether it was in the cause of the bourbons or the orleanists. at present he is bearing the lance in the cause of the orleanists alone, because there is no one else left. in any case, he thinks himself the first gentleman of france, the best known, the most influential, the head of the party; and as he is an irremovable senator, he thinks that the thrones of the neighboring kings are very insecure."as for my mother, she is my father's soul, she is the soul of the kingdom and of religion, and the scourge of all evil-thinkers."well, a letter was brought in while we were at dinner, and my father opened and read it, and then he said to mother: 'your brother is dying.' she grew very pale. my uncle was scarcely ever mentioned in the house, and i did not know him at all; all i knew from public talk was, that he had led, and was still leading, a gay life. after having spent his fortune in fast living, he was now in small apartments in the rue des martyrs."an ancient peer of france and former colonel of cavalry, it was said that he believed in neither god nor devil. not believing, therefore, in a future life he had abused the present life in every way, and had become a live wound in my mother's heart."'give me that letter, paul,' she said, and when she read it, i asked for it in my turn. here it is:monsieur le comte, i think i ought to let you know that your brother-in-law, the comte fumerol, is going to die. perhaps you would like to make some arrangements, and do not forget i told you. your servant, melanie."'we must take counsel,' papa murmured. 'in my position, i ought to watch over your brother's last moments.'"mamma continued: 'i will send for abbe poivron and ask his advice, and then i will go to my brother with the abbe and roger. remain here, paul, for you must not compromise yourself; but a woman can, and ought to do these things. for a politician in your position, it is another matter. it would be a fine thing for one of your opponents to be able to bring one of your most laudable actions up against you.' 'you are right,' my father said. 'do as you think best, my dear wife.'"a quarter of an hour, later, the abbe poivron came into the drawing- room, and the situation was explained to him, analyzed and discussed in all its bearings. if the marquis de fumerol, one of the greatest names in france, were to die without the ministrations of religion, it would assuredly be a terrible blow to the nobility in general, and to the count de tourneville in particular, and the freethinkers would be triumphant. the liberal newspapers would sing songs of victory for six months; my mother's name would be dragged through the mire and brought into the prose of socialistic journals, and my father's name would be smirched. it was impossible that such a thing should be."a crusade was therefore immediately decided upon, which was to be led by the abbe poivron, a little, fat, clean, priest with a faint perfume about him, a true vicar of a large church in a noble and rich quarter."the landau was ordered and we all three set out, my mother, the cure and i, to administer the last sacraments to my uncle."it had been decided first of all we should see madame melanie who had written the letter, and who was most likely the porter's wife, or my uncle's servant, and i dismounted, as an advance guard, in front of a seven-story house and went into a dark passage, where i had great difficulty in finding the porter's den. he looked at me distrustfully, and i said:"'madame melanie, if you please.' 'don't know her!' 'but i have received a letter from her.' 'that may be, but i don't know her. are you asking for a lodger?' 'no, a servant probably. she wrote me about a place.' 'a servant?--a servant? perhaps it is the marquis'. go and see, the fifth story on the left.'"as soon as he found i was not asking for a doubtful character he became more friendly and came as far as the corridor with me. he was a tall, thin man with white whiskers, the manners of a beadle and majestic gestures."i climbed up a long spiral staircase, the railing of which i did not venture to touch, and i gave three discreet knocks at the left-hand door on the fifth story. it opened immediately, and an enormous dirty woman appeared before me. she barred the entrance with her extended arms which she placed against the two doorposts, and growled:"'what do you want?' 'are you madame melanie?' 'yes.' 'i am the visconte de tourneville.' 'ah! all right! come in.' 'well, the fact is, my mother is downstairs with a priest.' 'oh! all right; go and bring them up; but be careful of the porter.'"i went downstairs and came up again with my mother, who was followed by the abbe, and i fancied that i heard other footsteps behind us. as soon as we were in the kitchen, melanie offered us chairs, and we all four sat down to deliberate."'is he very ill?' my mother asked. 'oh! yes, madame; he will not be here long.' 'does he seem disposed to receive a visit from a priest?' 'oh! i do not think so.' 'can i see him?' 'well--yes madame--only-- only--those young ladies are with him.' 'what young ladies?' 'why--why --his lady friends, of course.' 'oh!' mamma had grown scarlet, and the abbe poivron had lowered his eyes."the affair began to amuse me, and i said: 'suppose i go in first? i shall see how he receives me, and perhaps i shall be able to prepare him to receive you.'"my mother, who did not suspect any trick, replied: 'yes, go, my dear.' but a woman's voice cried out: 'melanie!'"the servant ran out and said: 'what do you want, mademoiselle claire?' 'the omelette; quickly.' 'in a minute, mademoiselle.' and coming back to us, she explained this summons."they had ordered a cheese omelette at two o'clock as a slight collation. and she at once began to break the eggs into a salad bowl, and to whip them vigorously, while i went out on the landing and pulled the bell, so as to formally announce my arrival. melanie opened the door to me, and made me sit down in an ante-room, while she went to tell my uncle that i had come; then she came back and asked me to go in, while the abbe hid behind the door, so that he might appear at the first signal."i was certainly very much surprised at the sight of my uncle, for he was very handsome, very solemn and very elegant, the old rake."sitting, almost lying, in a large armchair, his legs wrapped in blankets, his hands, his long, white hands, over the arms of the chair, he was waiting for death with the dignity of a patriarch. his white beard fell on his chest, and his hair, which was also white, mingled with it on his cheeks."standing behind his armchair, as if to defend him against me, were two young women, who looked at me with bold eyes. in their petticoats and morning wrappers, with bare arms, with coal black hair twisted in a knot on the nape of their neck, with embroidered, oriental slippers, which showed their ankles and silk stockings, they looked like the figures in some symbolical painting, by the side of the dying man. between the easy-chair and the bed, there was a table covered with a white cloth, on which two plates, two glasses, two forks and two knives, were waiting for the cheese omelette which had been ordered some time before of melanie."my uncle said in a weak, almost breathless, but clear voice:'good-morning, my child; it is rather late in the day to come and see me; our acquaintanceship will not last long.' i stammered out, 'it was not my fault, uncle:' 'no; i know that,' he replied. 'it is your father and mother's fault more than yours. how are they?' 'pretty well, thank you. when they heard that you were ill, they sent me to ask after you.' 'ah! why did they not come themselves?'"i looked up at the two girls and said gently: 'it is not their fault if they could not come, uncle. but it would be difficult for my father, and impossible for my mother to come in here.' the old man did not reply, but raised his hand toward mine, and i took the pale, cold hand and held it in my own."the door opened, melanie came in with the omelette and put it on the table, and the two girls immediately sat down at the table, and began to eat without taking their eyes off me. then i said: 'uncle, it would give great pleasure to my mother to embrace you.' 'i also,' he murmured, 'should like----' he said no more, and i could think of nothing to propose to him, and there was silence except for the noise of the plates and that vague sound of eating."now, the abbe, who was listening behind the door, seeing our embarrassment, and thinking we had won the game, thought the time had come to interpose, and showed himself. my uncle was so stupefied at sight of him that at first he remained motionless; and then he opened his mouth as if he meant to swallow up the priest, and shouted to him in a strong, deep, furious voice: 'what are you doing here?'"the abbe, who was used to difficult situations, came forward into the room, murmuring: 'i have come in your sister's name, monsieur le marquis; she has sent me. she would be happy, monsieur--'"but the marquis was not listening. raising one hand, he pointed to the door with a proud, tragic gesture, and said angrily and breathing hard: 'leave this room--go out--robber of souls. go out from here, you violator of consciences. go out from here, you pick-lock of dying men's doors!'"the abbe retreated, and i also went to the door, beating a retreat with the priest; the two young women, who had the best of it, got up, leaving their omelette only half eaten, and went and stood on either side of my uncle's easy-chair, putting their hands on his arms to calm him, and to protect him against the criminal enterprises of the family, and of religion."the abbe and i rejoined my mother in the kitchen, and melanie again offered us chairs. 'i knew quite well that this method would not work; we must try some other means, otherwise he will escape us.' and they began deliberating afresh, my mother being of one opinion and the abbe of another, while i held a third."we had been discussing the matter in a low voice for half an hour, perhaps, when a great noise of furniture being moved and of cries uttered by my uncle, more vehement and terrible even than the former had been, made us all four jump up."through the doors and walls we could hear him shouting: 'go out--out-- rascals--humbugs, get out, scoundrels--get out--get out!'"melanie rushed in, but came back immediately to call me to help her, and i hastened in. opposite to my uncle, who was terribly excited by anger, almost standing up and vociferating, stood two men, one behind the other, who seemed to be waiting till he should be dead with rage."by his ridiculous long coat, his long english shoes, his manners of a tutor out of a position, his high collar, white necktie and straight hair, his humble face of a false priest of a bastard religion, i immediately recognized the first as a protestant minister."the second was the porter of the house, who belonged to the reformed religion and had followed us, and having seen our defeat, had gone to fetch his own pastor, in hopes that he might meet a better reception. my uncle seemed mad with rage! if the sight of the catholic priest, of the priest of his ancestors, had irritated the marquis de fumerol, who had become a freethinker, the sight of his porter's minister made him altogether beside himself. i therefore took the two men by the arm and threw them out of the room so roughly that they bumped against each other twice, between the two doors which led to the staircase; and then i disappeared in my turn and returned to the kitchen, which was our headquarters in order to take counsel with my mother and the abbe."but melanie came back in terror, sobbing out:'he is dying--he is dying--come immediately--he is dying.'"my mother rushed out. my uncle had fallen to the ground, and lay full length along the floor, without moving. i fancy he was already dead. my mother was superb at that moment! she went straight up to the two girls who were kneeling by the body and trying to raise it up, and pointing to the door with irresistible authority, dignity and majesty, she said: 'now it is time for you to leave the room.'"and they went out without a word of protest. i must add, that i was getting ready to turn them out as unceremoniously as i had done the parson and the porter."then the abbe poivron administered the last sacraments to my uncle with all the customary prayers, and remitted all his sins, while my mother sobbed as she knelt near her brother. suddenly, however, she exclaimed: 'he recognized me; he pressed my hand; i am sure he recognized me!!!--and that he thanked me! oh, god, what happiness!'"poor mamma! if she had known or guessed for whom those thanks were intended!"they laid my uncle on his bed; he was certainly dead this time."'madame,' melanie said, 'we have no sheets to bury him in; all the linen belongs to these two young ladies,' and when i looked at the omelette which they had not finished, i felt inclined to laugh and to cry at the same time. there are some humorous moments and some humorous situations in life, occasionally!"we gave my uncle a magnificent fungal, with five speeches at the grave. baron de croiselles, the senator, showed in admirable terms that god always returns victorious into well-born souls which have temporarily been led into error. all the members of the royalist and catholic party followed the funeral procession with the enthusiasm of victors, as they spoke of that beautiful death after a somewhat troublous life."viscount roger ceased speaking; his audience was laughing. then somebody said: "bah! that is the story of all conversions in extremis."there were seven of us on a drag, four women and three men; one of the latter sat on the box seat beside the coachman. we were ascending, at a snail's pace, the winding road up the steep cliff along the coast.setting out from etretat at break of day in order to visit the ruins of tancarville, we were still half asleep, benumbed by the fresh air of the morning. the women especially, who were little accustomed to these early excursions, half opened and closed their eyes every moment, nodding their heads or yawning, quite insensible to the beauties of the dawn.it was autumn. on both sides of the road stretched the bare fields, yellowed by the stubble of wheat and oats which covered the soil like a beard that had been badly shaved. the moist earth seemed to steam. larks were singing high up in the air, while other birds piped in the bushes.the sun rose at length in front of us, bright red on the plane of the horizon, and in proportion as it ascended, growing clearer from minute to minute, the country seemed to awake, to smile, to shake itself like a young girl leaving her bed in her white robe of vapor. the comte d'etraille, who was seated on the box, cried:"look! look! a hare!" and he extended his arm toward the left, pointing to a patch of clover. the animal scurried along, almost hidden by the clover, only its large ears showing. then it swerved across a furrow, stopped, started off again at full speed, changed its course, stopped anew, uneasy, spying out every danger, uncertain what route to take, when suddenly it began to run with great bounds, disappearing finally in a large patch of beet-root. all the men had waked up to watch the course of the animal.rene lamanoir exclaimed:"we are not at all gallant this morning," and; regarding his neighbor, the little baroness de serennes, who struggled against sleep, he said to her in a low tone: "you are thinking of your husband, baroness. reassure yourself; he will not return before saturday, so you have still four days."she answered with a sleepy smile:"how stupid you are!" then, shaking off her torpor, she added: "now, let somebody say something to make us laugh. you, monsieur chenal, who have the reputation of having had more love affairs than the due de richelieu, tell us a love story in which you have played a part; anything you like."leon chenal, an old painter, who had once been very handsome, very strong, very proud of his physique and very popular with women, took his long white beard in his hand and smiled. then, after a few moments' reflection, he suddenly became serious."ladies, it will not be an amusing tale, for i am going to relate to you the saddest love affair of my life, and i sincerely hope that none of my friends may ever pass through a similar experience."i was twenty-five years of age and was pillaging along the coast of normandy. i call 'pillaging' wandering about, with a knapsack on one's back, from inn to inn, under the pretext of making studies and sketching landscapes. i knew nothing more enjoyable than that happy-go-lucky wandering life, in which one is perfectly free, without shackles of any kind, without care, without preoccupation, without thinking even of the morrow. one goes in any direction one pleases, without any guide save his fancy, without any counsellor save his eyes. one stops because a running brook attracts one, because the smell of potatoes frying tickles one's olfactories on passing an inn. sometimes it is the perfume of clematis which decides one in his choice or the roguish glance of the servant at an inn. do not despise me for my affection for these rustics. these girls have a soul as well as senses, not to mention firm cheeks and fresh lips; while their hearty and willing kisses have the flavor of wild fruit. love is always love, come whence it may. a heart that beats at your approach, an eye that weeps when you go away are things so rare, so sweet, so precious that they must never be despised."i have had rendezvous in ditches full of primroses, behind the cow stable and in barns among the straw, still warm from the heat of the day. i have recollections of coarse gray cloth covering supple peasant skin and regrets for simple, frank kisses, more delicate in their unaffected sincerity than the subtle favors of charming and distinguished women."but what one loves most amid all these varied adventures is the country, the woods, the rising of the sun, the twilight, the moonlight. these are, for the painter, honeymoon trips with nature. one is alone with her in that long and quiet association. you go to sleep in the fields, amid marguerites and poppies, and when you open your eyes in the full glare of the sunlight you descry in the distance the little village with its pointed clock tower which sounds the hour of noon."you sit down by the side of a spring which gushes out at the foot of an oak, amid a growth of tall, slender weeds, glistening with life. you go down on your knees, bend forward and drink that cold, pellucid water which wets your mustache and nose; you drink it with a physical pleasure, as though you kissed the spring, lip to lip. sometimes, when you find a deep hole along the course of these tiny brooks, you plunge in quite naked, and you feel on your skin, from head to foot, as it were, an icy and delicious caress, the light and gentle quivering of the stream."you are gay on the hills, melancholy on the edge of ponds, inspired when the sun is setting in an ocean of blood-red clouds and casts red reflections or the river. and at night, under the moon, which passes across the vault of heaven, you think of a thousand strange things which would never have occurred to your mind under the brilliant light of day."so, in wandering through the same country where we, are this year, i came to the little village of benouville, on the cliff between yport and etretat. i came from fecamp, following the coast, a high coast as straight as a wall, with its projecting chalk cliffs descending perpendicularly into the sea. i had walked since early morning on the short grass, smooth and yielding as a carpet, that grows on the edge of the cliff. and, singing lustily, i walked with long strides, looking sometimes at the slow circling flight of a gull with its white curved wings outlined on the blue sky, sometimes at the brown sails of a fishing bark on the green sea. in short, i had passed a happy day, a day of liberty and of freedom from care."a little farmhouse where travellers were lodged was pointed out to me, a kind of inn, kept by a peasant woman, which stood in the centre of a norman courtyard surrounded by a double row of beeches."leaving the coast, i reached the hamlet, which was hemmed in by great trees, and i presented myself at the house of mother lecacheur."she was an old, wrinkled and stern peasant woman, who seemed always to receive customers under protest, with a kind of defiance."it was the month of may. the spreading apple trees covered the court with a shower of blossoms which rained unceasingly both upon people and upon the grass."i said: 'well, madame lecacheur, have you a room for me?'"astonished to find that i knew her name, she answered:"'that depends; everything is let, but all the same i can find out.""in five minutes we had come to an agreement, and i deposited my bag upon the earthen floor of a rustic room, furnished with a bed, two chairs, a table and a washbowl. the room looked into the large, smoky kitchen, where the lodgers took their meals with the people of the farm and the landlady, who was a widow."i washed my hands, after which i went out. the old woman was making a chicken fricassee for dinner in the large fireplace in which hung the iron pot, black with smoke."'you have travellers, then, at the present time?' said i to her."she answered in an offended tone of voice:"'i have a lady, an english lady, who has reached years of maturity. she occupies the other room.'"i obtained, by means of an extra five sous a day, the privilege of dining alone out in the yard when the weather was fine."my place was set outside the door, and i was beginning to gnaw the lean limbs of the normandy chicken, to drink the clear cider and to munch the hunk of white bread, which was four days old but excellent."suddenly the wooden gate which gave on the highway was opened, and a strange lady directed her steps toward the house. she was very thin, very tall, so tightly enveloped in a red scotch plaid shawl that one might have supposed she had no arms, if one had not seen a long hand appear just above the hips, holding a white tourist umbrella. her face was like that of a mummy, surrounded with curls of gray hair, which tossed about at every step she took and made me think, i know not why, of a pickled herring in curl papers. lowering her eyes, she passed quickly in front of me and entered the house."that singular apparition cheered me. she undoubtedly was my neighbor, the english lady of mature age of whom our hostess had spoken."i did not see her again that day. the next day, when i had settled myself to commence painting at the end of that beautiful valley which you know and which extends as far as etretat, i perceived, on lifting my eyes suddenly, something singular standing on the crest of the cliff, one might have said a pole decked out with flags. it was she. on seeing me, she suddenly disappeared. i reentered the house at midday for lunch and took my seat at the general table, so as to make the acquaintance of this odd character. but she did not respond to my polite advances, was insensible even to my little attentions. i poured out water for her persistently, i passed her the dishes with great eagerness. a slight, almost imperceptible, movement of the head and an english word, murmured so low that i did not understand it, were her only acknowledgments."i ceased occupying myself with her, although she had disturbed my thoughts."at the end of three days i knew as much about her as did madame lecacheur herself."she was called miss harriet. seeking out a secluded village in which to pass the summer, she had been attracted to benouville some six months before and did not seem disposed to leave it. she never spoke at table, ate rapidly, reading all the while a small book of the protestant propaganda. she gave a copy of it to everybody. the cure himself had received no less than four copies, conveyed by an urchin to whom she had paid two sous commission. she said sometimes to our hostess abruptly, without preparing her in the least for the declaration:"'i love the saviour more than all. i admire him in all creation; i adore him in all nature; i carry him always in my heart.'"and she would immediately present the old woman with one of her tracts which were destined to convert the universe."in, the village she was not liked. in fact, the schoolmaster having pronounced her an atheist, a kind of stigma attached to her. the cure, who had been consulted by madame lecacheur, responded:"'she is a heretic, but god does not wish the death of the sinner, and i believe her to be a person of pure morals.'"these words, 'atheist,' 'heretic,' words which no one can precisely define, threw doubts into some minds. it was asserted, however, that this english woman was rich and that she had passed her life in travelling through every country in the world because her family had cast her off. why had her family cast her off? because of her impiety, of course!"she was, in fact, one of those people of exalted principles; one of those opinionated puritans, of which england produces so many; one of those good and insupportable old maids who haunt the tables d'hote of every hotel in europe, who spoil italy, poison switzerland, render the charming cities of the mediterranean uninhabitable, carry everywhere their fantastic manias their manners of petrified vestals, their indescribable toilets and a certain odor of india-rubber which makes one believe that at night they are slipped into a rubber casing."whenever i caught sight of one of these individuals in a hotel i fled like the birds who see a scarecrow in a field."this woman, however, appeared so very singular that she did not displease me."madame lecacheur, hostile by instinct to everything that was not rustic, felt in her narrow soul a kind of hatred for the ecstatic declarations of the old maid. she had found a phrase by which to describe her, a term of contempt that rose to her lips, called forth by i know not what confused and mysterious mental ratiocination. she said: 'that woman is a demoniac.' this epithet, applied to that austere and sentimental creature, seemed to me irresistibly droll. i myself never called her anything now but 'the demoniac,' experiencing a singular pleasure in pronouncing aloud this word on perceiving her."one day i asked mother lecacheur : 'well, what is our demoniac about to- day?'"to which my rustic friend replied with a shocked air:"'what do you think, sir? she picked up a toad which had had its paw crushed and carried it to her room and has put it in her washbasin and bandaged it as if it were a man. if that is not profanation i should like to know what is!'"on another occasion, when walking along the shore she bought a large fish which had just been caught, simply to throw it back into the sea again. the sailor from whom she had bought it, although she paid him handsomely, now began to swear, more exasperated, indeed, than if she had put her hand into his pocket and taken his money. for more than a month he could not speak of the circumstance without becoming furious and denouncing it as an outrage. oh, yes! she was indeed a demoniac, this miss harriet, and mother lecacheur must have had an inspiration in thus christening her."the stable boy, who was called sapeur, because he had served in africa in his youth, entertained other opinions. he said with a roguish air: 'she is an old hag who has seen life.'"if the poor woman had but known!"the little kind-hearted celeste did not wait upon her willingly, but i was never able to understand why. probably her only reason was that she was a stranger, of another race; of a different tongue and of another religion. she was, in fact, a demoniac!"she passed her time wandering about the country, adoring and seeking god in nature. i found her one evening on her knees in a cluster of bushes. having discovered something red through the leaves, i brushed aside the branches, and miss harriet at once rose to her feet, confused at having been found thus, fixing on me terrified eyes like those of an owl surprised in open day."sometimes, when i was working among the rocks, i would suddenly descry her on the edge of the cliff like a lighthouse signal. she would be gazing in rapture at the vast sea glittering in the sunlight and the boundless sky with its golden tints. sometimes i would distinguish her at the end of the valley, walking quickly with her elastic english step, and i would go toward her, attracted by i know not what, simply to see her illuminated visage, her dried-up, ineffable features, which seemed to glow with inward and profound happiness."i would often encounter her also in the corner of a field, sitting on the grass under the shadow of an apple tree, with her little religious booklet lying open on her knee while she gazed out at the distance."i could not tear myself away from that quiet country neighborhood, to which i was attached by a thousand links of love for its wide and peaceful landscape. i was happy in this sequestered farm, far removed from everything, but in touch with the earth, the good, beautiful, green earth. and--must i avow it?--there was, besides, a little curiosity which retained me at the residence of mother lecacheur. i wished to become acquainted a little with this strange miss harriet and to know what transpires in the solitary souls of those wandering old english women."we became acquainted in a rather singular manner. i had just finished a study which appeared to me to be worth something, and so it was, as it sold for ten thousand francs fifteen years later. it was as simple, however, as two and two make four and was not according to academic rules. the whole right side of my canvas represented a rock, an enormous rock, covered with sea-wrack, brown, yellow and red, across which the sun poured like a stream of oil. the light fell upon the rock as though it were aflame without the sun, which was at my back, being visible. that was all. a first bewildering study of blazing, gorgeous light."on the left was the sea, not the blue sea, the slate-colored sea, but a sea of jade, greenish, milky and solid beneath the deep-colored sky."i was so pleased with my work that i danced from sheer delight as i carried it back to the inn. i would have liked the whole world to see it at once. i can remember that i showed it to a cow that was browsing by the wayside, exclaiming as i did so: 'look at that, my old beauty; you will not often see its like again.'"when i had reached the house i immediately called out to mother lecacheur, shouting with all my might:"'hullo, there! mrs. landlady, come here and look at this.'"the rustic approached and looked at my work with her stupid eyes which distinguished nothing and could not even tell whether the picture represented an ox or a house."miss harriet just then came home, and she passed behind me just as i was holding out my canvas at arm's length, exhibiting it to our landlady. the demoniac could not help but see it, for i took care to exhibit the thing in such a way that it could not escape her notice. she stopped abruptly and stood motionless, astonished. it was her rock which was depicted, the one which she climbed to dream away her time undisturbed."she uttered a british 'aoh,' which was at once so accentuated and so flattering that i turned round to her, smiling, and said:"'this is my latest study, mademoiselle.'"she murmured rapturously, comically and tenderly:"'oh! monsieur, you understand nature as a living thing.'"i colored and was more touched by that compliment than if it had come from a queen. i was captured, conquered, vanquished. i could have embraced her, upon my honor."i took my seat at table beside her as usual. for the first time she spoke, thinking aloud:"'oh! i do love nature.'"i passed her some bread, some water, some wine. she now accepted these with a little smile of a mummy. i then began to talk about the scenery."after the meal we rose from the table together and walked leisurely across the courtyard; then, attracted doubtless by the fiery glow which the setting sun cast over the surface of the sea, i opened the gate which led to the cliff, and we walked along side by side, as contented as two persons might be who have just learned to understand and penetrate each other's motives and feelings."it was one of those warm, soft evenings which impart a sense of ease to flesh and spirit alike. all is enjoyment, everything charms. the balmy air, laden with the perfume of grasses and the smell of seaweed, soothes the olfactory sense with its wild fragrance, soothes the palate with its sea savor, soothes the mind with its pervading sweetness."we were now walking along the edge of the cliff, high above the boundless sea which rolled its little waves below us at a distance of a hundred metres. and we drank in with open mouth and expanded chest that fresh breeze, briny from kissing the waves, that came from the ocean and passed across our faces."wrapped in her plaid shawl, with a look of inspiration as she faced the breeze, the english woman gazed fixedly at the great sun ball as it descended toward the horizon. far off in the distance a three-master in full sail was outlined on the blood-red sky and a steamship, somewhat nearer, passed along, leaving behind it a trail of smoke on the horizon. the red sun globe sank slowly lower and lower and presently touched the water just behind the motionless vessel, which, in its dazzling effulgence, looked as though framed in a flame of fire. we saw it plunge, grow smaller and disappear, swallowed up by the ocean."miss harriet gazed in rapture at the last gleams of the dying day. she seemed longing to embrace the sky, the sea, the whole landscape."she murmured: 'aoh! i love--i love' i saw a tear in her eye. she continued: 'i wish i were a little bird, so that i could mount up into the firmament.'"she remained standing as i had often before seen her, perched on the cliff, her face as red as her shawl. i should have liked to have sketched her in my album. it would have been a caricature of ecstasy."i turned away so as not to laugh."i then spoke to her of painting as i would have done to a fellow artist, using the technical terms common among the devotees of the profession. she listened attentively, eagerly seeking to divine the meaning of the terms, so as to understand my thoughts. from time to time she would exclaim:'oh! i understand, i understand. it is very interesting.'"we returned home."the next day, on seeing me, she approached me, cordially holding out her hand; and we at once became firm friends."she was a good creature who had a kind of soul on springs, which became enthusiastic at a bound. she lacked equilibrium like all women who are spinsters at the age of fifty. she seemed to be preserved in a pickle of innocence, but her heart still retained something very youthful and inflammable. she loved both nature and animals with a fervor, a love like old wine fermented through age, with a sensuous love that she had never bestowed on men."one thing is certain, that the sight of a bitch nursing her puppies, a mare roaming in a meadow with a foal at its side, a bird's nest full of young ones, screaming, with their open mouths and their enormous heads, affected her perceptibly."poor, solitary, sad, wandering beings! i love you ever since i became acquainted with miss harriet."i soon discovered that she had something she would like to tell me, but dare not, and i was amused at her timidity. when i started out in the morning with my knapsack on my back, she would accompany me in silence as far as the end of the village, evidently struggling to find words with which to begin a conversation. then she would leave me abruptly and walk away quickly with her springy step."one day, however, she plucked up courage:"i would like to see how you paint pictures. are you willing? i have been very curious.'"and she blushed as if she had said something very audacious."i conducted her to the bottom of the petit-val, where i had begun a large picture."she remained standing behind me, following all my gestures with concentrated attention. then, suddenly, fearing perhaps that she was disturbing me, she said: 'thank you,' and walked away."but she soon became more friendly, and accompanied me every day, her countenance exhibiting visible pleasure. she carried her camp stool under her arm, not permitting me to carry it. she would remain there for hours, silent and motionless, following with her eyes the point of my brush, in its every movement. when i obtained unexpectedly just the effect i wanted by a dash of color put on with the palette knife, she involuntarily uttered a little 'ah!' of astonishment, of joy, of admiration. she had the most tender respect for my canvases, an almost religious respect for that human reproduction of a part of nature's work divine. my studies appeared to her a kind of religious pictures, and sometimes she spoke to me of god, with the idea of converting me."oh, he was a queer, good-natured being, this god of hers! he was a sort of village philosopher without any great resources and without great power, for she always figured him to herself as inconsolable over injustices committed under his eyes, as though he were powerless to prevent them."she was, however, on excellent terms with him, affecting even to be the confidante of his secrets and of his troubles. she would say:"'god wills' or 'god does not will,' just like a sergeant announcing to a recruit: 'the colonel has commanded.'"at the bottom of her heart she deplored my ignorance of the intentions of the eternal, which she endeavored to impart to me."almost every day i found in my pockets, in my hat when i lifted it from the ground, in my paintbox, in my polished shoes, standing in front of my door in the morning, those little pious tracts which she no doubt, received directly from paradise."i treated her as one would an old friend, with unaffected cordiality. but i soon perceived that she had changed somewhat in her manner, though, for a while, i paid little attention to it."when i was painting, whether in my valley or in some country lane, i would see her suddenly appear with her rapid, springy walk. she would then sit down abruptly, out of breath, as though she had been running or were overcome by some profound emotion. her face would be red, that english red which is denied to the people of all other countries; then, without any reason, she would turn ashy pale and seem about to faint away. gradually, however, her natural color would return and she would begin to speak."then, without warning, she would break off in the middle of a sentence, spring up from her seat and walk away so rapidly and so strangely that i was at my wits' ends to discover whether i had done or said anything to displease or wound her."i finally came to the conclusion that those were her normal manners, somewhat modified no doubt in my honor during the first days of our acquaintance."when she returned to the farm, after walking for hours on the windy coast, her long curls often hung straight down, as if their springs had been broken. this had hitherto seldom given her any concern, and she would come to dinner without embarrassment all dishevelled by her sister, the breeze.but now she would go to her room and arrange the untidy locks, and when i would say, with familiar gallantry, which, however, always offended her "'you are as beautiful as a star to-day, miss harriet,' a blush would immediately rise to her cheeks, the blush of a young girl, of a girl of fifteen."then she would suddenly become quite reserved and cease coming to watch me paint. i thought, 'this is only a fit of temper; it will blow over.' but it did not always blow over, and when i spoke to her she would answer me either with affected indifference or with sullen annoyance."she became by turns rude, impatient and nervous. i never saw her now except at meals, and we spoke but little. i concluded at length that i must have offended her in some way, and, accordingly, i said to her one evening:"'miss harriet, why is it that you do not act toward me as formerly? what have i done to displease you? you are causing me much pain!'"she replied in a most comical tone of anger:"'i am just the same with you as formerly. it is not true, not true,' and she ran upstairs and shut herself up in her room."occasionally she would look at me in a peculiar manner. i have often said to myself since then that those who are condemned to death must look thus when they are informed that their last day has come. in her eye there lurked a species of insanity, an insanity at once mystical and violent; and even more, a fever, an aggravated longing, impatient and impotent, for the unattained and unattainable."nay, it seemed to me there was also going on within her a struggle in which her heart wrestled with an unknown force that she sought to master, and even, perhaps, something else. but what do i know? what do i know?"it was indeed a singular revelation."for some time i had commenced to work, as soon as daylight appeared, on a picture the subject of which was as follows:"a deep ravine, enclosed, surmounted by two thickets of trees and vines, extended into the distance and was lost, submerged in that milky vapor, in that cloud like cotton down that sometimes floats over valleys at daybreak. and at the extreme end of that heavy, transparent fog one saw, or, rather, surmised, that a couple of human beings were approaching, a human couple, a youth and a maiden, their arms interlaced, embracing each other, their heads inclined toward each other, their lips meeting."a first ray of the sun, glistening through the branches, pierced that fog of the dawn, illuminated it with a rosy reflection just behind the rustic lovers, framing their vague shadows in a silvery background. it was well done; yes, indeed, well done."i was working on the declivity which led to the valley of etretat. on this particular morning i had, by chance, the sort of floating vapor which i needed. suddenly something rose up in front of me like a phantom; it was miss harriet. on seeing me she was about to flee. but i called after her, saying: 'come here, come here, mademoiselle. i have a nice little picture for you.'"she came forward, though with seeming reluctance. i handed her my sketch. she said nothing, but stood for a long time, motionless, looking at it, and suddenly she burst into tears. she wept spasmodically, like men who have striven hard to restrain their tears, but who can do so no longer and abandon themselves to grief, though still resisting. i sprang to my feet, moved at the sight of a sorrow i did not comprehend, and i took her by the hand with an impulse of brusque affection, a true french impulse which acts before it reflects."she let her hands rest in mine for a few seconds, and i felt them quiver as if all her nerves were being wrenched. then she withdrew her hands abruptly, or, rather, snatched them away."i recognized that tremor, for i had felt it, and i could not be deceived. ah! the love tremor of a woman, whether she be fifteen or fifty years of age, whether she be of the people or of society, goes so straight to my heart that i never have any hesitation in understanding it!"her whole frail being had trembled, vibrated, been overcome. i knew it. she walked away before i had time to say a word, leaving me as surprised as if i had witnessed a miracle and as troubled as if i had committed a crime."i did not go in to breakfast. i went to take a turn on the edge of the cliff, feeling that i would just as lief weep as laugh, looking on the adventure as both comic and deplorable and my position as ridiculous, believing her unhappy enough to go insane."i asked myself what i ought to do. it seemed best for me to leave the place, and i immediately resolved to do so."somewhat sad and perplexed, i wandered about until dinner time and entered the farmhouse just when the soup had been served up."i sat down at the table as usual. miss harriet was there, eating away solemnly, without speaking to any one, without even lifting her eyes. her manner and expression were, however, the same as usual."i waited patiently till the meal had been finished, when, turning toward the landlady, i said: 'well, madame lecacheur, it will not be long now before i shall have to take my leave of you.'"the good woman, at once surprised and troubled, replied in her drawling voice: 'my dear sir, what is it you say? you are going to leave us after i have become so accustomed to you?'"i glanced at miss harriet out of the corner of my eye. her countenance did not change in the least. but celeste, the little servant, looked up at me. she was a fat girl, of about eighteen years of age, rosy, fresh, as strong as a horse, and possessing the rare attribute of cleanliness. i had kissed her at odd times in out-of-the-way corners, after the manner of travellers--nothing more."the dinner being at length over, i went to smoke my pipe under the apple trees, walking up and down from one end of the enclosure to the other. all the reflections which i had made during the day, the strange discovery of the morning, that passionate and grotesque attachment for me, the recollections which that revelation had suddenly called up, recollections at once charming and perplexing, perhaps also that look which the servant had cast on me at the announcement of my departure--all these things, mixed up and combined, put me now in a reckless humor, gave me a tickling sensation of kisses on the lips and in my veins a something which urged me on to commit some folly."night was coming on, casting its dark shadows under the trees, when i descried celeste, who had gone to fasten up the poultry yard at the other end of the enclosure. i darted toward her, running so noiselessly that she heard nothing, and as she got up from closing the small trapdoor by which the chickens got in and out, i clasped her in my arms and rained on her coarse, fat face a shower of kisses. she struggled, laughing all the time, as she was accustomed to do in such circumstances. why did i suddenly loose my grip of her? why did i at once experience a shock? what was it that i heard behind me?"it was miss harriet, who had come upon us, who had seen us and who stood in front of us motionless as a spectre. then she disappeared in the darkness."i was ashamed, embarrassed, more desperate at having been thus surprised by her than if she had caught me committing some criminal act."i slept badly that night. i was completely unnerved and haunted by sad thoughts. i seemed to hear loud weeping, but in this i was no doubt deceived. moreover, i thought several times that i heard some one walking up and down in the house and opening the hall door."toward morning i was overcome by fatigue and fell asleep. i got up late and did not go downstairs until the late breakfast, being still in a bewildered state, not knowing what kind of expression to put on."no one had seen miss harriet. we waited for her at table, but she did not appear. at length mother lecacheur went to her room. the english woman had gone out. she must have set out at break of day, as she was wont to do, in order to see the sun rise."nobody seemed surprised at this, and we began to eat in silence."the weather was hot, very hot, one of those broiling, heavy days when not a leaf stirs. the table had been placed out of doors, under an apple tree, and from time to time sapeur had gone to the cellar to draw a jug of cider, everybody was so thirsty. celeste brought the dishes from the kitchen, a ragout of mutton with potatoes, a cold rabbit and a salad. afterward she placed before us a dish of strawberries, the first of the season."as i wished to wash and freshen these, i begged the servant to go and draw me a pitcher of cold water."in about five minutes she returned, declaring that the well was dry. she had lowered the pitcher to the full extent of the cord and had touched the bottom, but on drawing the pitcher up again it was empty. mother lecacheur, anxious to examine the thing for herself, went and looked down the hole. she returned, announcing that one could see clearly something in the well, something altogether unusual. but this no doubt was bundles of straw, which a neighbor had thrown in out of spite."i wished to look down the well also, hoping i might be able to clear up the mystery, and i perched myself close to the brink. i perceived indistinctly a white object. what could it be? i then conceived the idea of lowering a lantern at the end of a cord. when i did so the yellow flame danced on the layers of stone and gradually became clearer. all four of us were leaning over the opening, sapeur and celeste having now joined us. the lantern rested on a black-and-white indistinct mass, singular, incomprehensible. sapeur exclaimed:"'it is a horse. i see the hoofs. it must have got out of the meadow during the night and fallen in headlong.'"but suddenly a cold shiver froze me to the marrow. i first recognized a foot, then a leg sticking up; the whole body and the other leg were completely under water."i stammered out in a loud voice, trembling so violently that the lantern danced hither and thither over the slipper:"'it is a woman! who-who-can it be? it is miss harriet!'"sapeur alone did not manifest horror. he had witnessed many such scenes in africa."mother lecacheur and celeste began to utter piercing screams and ran away."but it was necessary to recover the corpse of the dead woman. i attached the young man securely by the waist to the end of the pulley rope and lowered him very slowly, watching him disappear in the darkness. in one hand he held the lantern and a rope in the other. soon i recognized his voice, which seemed to come from the centre of the earth, saying:'stop!'"i then saw him fish something out of the water. it was the other leg. he then bound the two feet together and shouted anew:"'haul up!'"i began to wind up, but i felt my arms crack, my muscles twitch, and i was in terror lest i should let the man fall to the bottom. when his head appeared at the brink i asked:"'well?' as if i expected he had a message from the drowned woman."we both got on the stone slab at the edge of the well and from opposite sides we began to haul up the body."mother lecacheur and celeste watched us from a distance, concealed from view behind the wall of the house. when they saw issuing from the hole the black slippers and white stockings of the drowned person they disappeared."sapeur seized the ankles, and we drew up the body of the poor woman. the head was shocking to look at, being bruised and lacerated, and the long gray hair, out of curl forevermore, hanging down tangled and disordered."'in the name of all that is holy! how lean she is,' exclaimed sapeur in a contemptuous tone."we carried her into the room, and as the women did not put in an appearance i, with the assistance of the stable lad, dressed the corpse for burial."i washed her disfigured face. under the touch of my finger an eye was slightly opened and regarded me with that pale, cold look, that terrible look of a corpse which seems to come from the beyond. i braided as well as i could her dishevelled hair and with my clumsy hands arranged on her head a novel and singular coiffure. then i took off her dripping wet garments, baring, not without a feeling of shame, as though i had been guilty of some profanation, her shoulders and her chest and her long arms, as slim as the twigs of a tree."i next went to fetch some flowers, poppies, bluets, marguerites and fresh, sweet-smelling grass with which to strew her funeral couch."i then had to go through the usual formalities, as i was alone to attend to everything. a letter found in her pocket, written at the last moment, requested that her body be buried in the village in which she had passed the last days of her life. a sad suspicion weighed on my heart. was it not on my account that she wished to be laid to rest in this place?"toward evening all the female gossips of the locality came to view the remains of the defunct, but i would not allow a single person to enter. i wanted to be alone, and i watched beside her all night."i looked at the corpse by the flickering light of the candles, at this unhappy woman, unknown to us all, who had died in such a lamentable manner and so far away from home. had she left no friends, no relations behind her? what had her infancy been? what had been her life? whence had she come thither alone, a wanderer, lost like a dog driven from home? what secrets of sufferings and of despair were sealed up in that unprepossessing body, in that poor body whose outward appearance had driven from her all affection, all love?"how many unhappy beings there are! i felt that there weighed upon that human creature the eternal injustice of implacable nature! it was all over with her, without her ever having experienced, perhaps, that which sustains the greatest outcasts to wit, the hope of being loved once! otherwise why should she thus have concealed herself, fled from the face of others? why did she love everything so tenderly and so passionately, everything living that was not a man?"i recognized the fact that she believed in a god, and that she hoped to receive compensation from the latter for all the miseries she had endured. she would now disintegrate and become, in turn, a plant. she would blossom in the sun, the cattle would browse on her leaves, the birds would bear away the seeds, and through these changes she would become again human flesh. but that which is called the soul had been extinguished at the bottom of the dark well. she suffered no longer. she had given her life for that of others yet to come."hours passed away in this silent and sinister communion with the dead. a pale light at length announced the dawn of a new day; then a red ray streamed in on the bed, making a bar of light across the coverlet and across her hands. this was the hour she had so much loved. the awakened birds began to sing in the trees."i opened the window to its fullest extent and drew back the curtains that the whole heavens might look in upon us, and, bending over the icy corpse, i took in my hands the mutilated head and slowly, without terror or disgust, i imprinted a kiss, a long kiss, upon those lips which had never before been kissed."leon chenal remained silent. the women wept. we heard on the box seat the count d'atraille blowing his nose from time to time. the coachman alone had gone to sleep. the horses, who no longer felt the sting of the whip, had slackened their pace and moved along slowly. the drag, hardly advancing at all, seemed suddenly torpid, as if it had been freighted with sorrow.i was very much interested at that time in a droll little woman. she was married, of course, as i have a horror of unmarried flirts. what enjoyment is there in making love to a woman who belongs to nobody and yet belongs to any one? and, besides, morality aside, i do not understand love as a trade. that disgusts me somewhat.the especial attraction in a married woman to a bachelor is that she gives him a home, a sweet, pleasant home where every one takes care of you and spoils you, from the husband to the servants. one finds everything combined there, love, friendship, even fatherly interest, bed and board, all, in fact, that constitutes the happiness of life, with this incalculable advantage, that one can change one's family from time to time, take up one's abode in all kinds of society in turn: in summer, in the country with the workman who rents you a room in his house; in winter with the townsfolk, or even with the nobility, if one is ambitious.i have another weakness; it is that i become attached to the husband as well as the wife. i acknowledge even that some husbands, ordinary or coarse as they may be, give me a feeling of disgust for their wives, however charming they may be. but when the husband is intellectual or charming i invariably become very much attached to him. i am careful if i quarrel with the wife not to quarrel with the husband. in this way i have made some of my best friends, and have also proved in many cases the incontestable superiority of the male over the female in the human species. the latter makes all sorts of trouble-scenes, reproaches, etc.; while the former, who has just as good a right to complain, treats you, on the contrary, as though you were the special providence of his hearth.well, my friend was a quaint little woman, a brunette, fanciful, capricious, pious, superstitious, credulous as a monk, but charming. she had a way of kissing one that i never saw in any one else--but that was not the attraction--and such a soft skin! it gave me intense delight merely to hold her hands. and an eye--her glance was like a slow caress, delicious and unending. sometimes i would lean my head on her knee and we would remain motionless, she leaning over me with that subtle, enigmatic, disturbing smile that women have, while my eyes would be raised to hers, drinking sweetly and deliciously into my heart, like a form of intoxication, the glance of her limpid blue eyes, limpid as though they were full of thoughts of love, and blue as though they were a heaven of delights.her husband, inspector of some large public works, was frequently away from home and left us our evenings free. sometimes i spent them with her lounging on the divan with my forehead on one of her knees; while on the other lay an enormous black cat called "misti," whom she adored. our fingers would meet on the cat's back and would intertwine in her soft silky fur. i felt its warm body against my cheek, trembling with its eternal purring, and occasionally a paw would reach out and place on my mouth, or my eyelid, five unsheathed claws which would prick my eyelids, and then be immediately withdrawn.sometimes we would go out on what we called our escapades. they were very innocent, however. they consisted in taking supper at some inn in the suburbs, or else, after dining at her house or at mine, in making the round of the cheap cafes, like students out for a lark.we would go into the common drinking places and take our seats at the end of the smoky den on two rickety chairs, at an old wooden table. a cloud of pungent smoke, with which blended an odor of fried fish from dinner, filled the room. men in smocks were talking in loud tones as they drank their petits verres, and the astonished waiter placed before us two cherry brandies.she, trembling, charmingly afraid, would raise her double black veil as far as her nose, and then take up her glass with the enjoyment that one feels at doing something delightfully naughty. each cherry she swallowed made her feel as if she had done something wrong, each swallow of the burning liquor had on her the affect of a delicate and forbidden enjoyment.then she would say to me in a low tone: "let us go." and we would leave, she walking quickly with lowered head between the drinkers who watched her going by with a look of displeasure. and as soon as we got into the street she would give a great sigh of relief, as if we had escaped some terrible danger.sometimes she would ask me with a shudder:"suppose they, should say something rude to me in those places, what would you do?" "why, i would defend you, parbleu!" i would reply in a resolute manner. and she would squeeze my arm for happiness, perhaps with a vague wish that she might be insulted and protected, that she might see men fight on her account, even those men, with me!one evening as we sat at a table in a tavern at montmartre, we saw an old woman in tattered garments come in, holding in her hand a pack of dirty cards. perceiving a lady, the old woman at once approached us and offered to tell my friend's fortune. emma, who in her heart believed in everything, was trembling with longing and anxiety, and she made a place beside her for the old woman.the latter, old, wrinkled, her eyes with red inflamed rings round them, and her mouth without a single tooth in it, began to deal her dirty cards on the table. she dealt them in piles, then gathered them up, and then dealt them out again, murmuring indistinguishable words. emma, turning pale, listened with bated breath, gasping with anxiety and curiosity.the fortune-teller broke silence. she predicted vague happenings: happiness and children, a fair young man, a voyage, money, a lawsuit, a dark man, the return of some one, success, a death. the mention of this death attracted the younger woman's attention. "whose death? when? in what manner?"the old woman replied: "oh, as to that, these cards are not certain enough. you must come to my place to-morrow; i will tell you about it with coffee grounds which never make a mistake."emma turned anxiously to me:"say, let us go there to-morrow. oh, please say yes. if not, you cannot imagine how worried i shall be."i began to laugh."we will go if you wish it, dearie."the old woman gave us her address. she lived on the sixth floor, in a wretched house behind the buttes-chaumont. we went there the following day.her room, an attic containing two chairs and a bed, was filled with strange objects, bunches of herbs hanging from nails, skins of animals, flasks and phials containing liquids of various colors. on the table a stuffed black cat looked out of eyes of glass. he seemed like the demon of this sinister dwelling.emma, almost fainting with emotion, sat down on a chair and exclaimed:"oh, dear, look at that cat; how like it is to misti."and she explained to the old woman that she had a cat "exactly like that, exactly like that!"the old woman replied gravely:"if you are in love with a man, you must not keep it."emma, suddenly filled with fear, asked:"why not?"the old woman sat down familiarly beside her and took her hand."it was the undoing of my life," she said.my friend wanted to hear about it. she leaned against the old woman, questioned her, begged her to tell. at length the woman agreed to do so."i loved that cat," she said, "as one would love a brother. i was young then and all alone, a seamstress. i had only him, mouton. one of the tenants had given it to me. he was as intelligent as a child, and gentle as well, and he worshiped me, my dear lady, he worshiped me more than one does a fetish. all day long he would sit on my lap purring, and all night long on my pillow; i could feel his heart beating, in fact."well, i happened to make an acquaintance, a fine young man who was working in a white-goods house. that went on for about three months on a footing of mere friendship. but you know one is liable to weaken, it may happen to any one, and, besides, i had really begun to love him. he was so nice, so nice, and so good. he wanted us to live together, for economy's sake. i finally allowed him to come and see me one evening. i had not made up my mind to anything definite; oh, no! but i was pleased at the idea that we should spend an hour together."at first he behaved very well, said nice things to me that made my heart go pit-a-pat. and then he kissed me, madame, kissed me as one does when they love. i remained motionless, my eyes closed, in a paroxysm of happiness. but, suddenly, i felt him start violently and he gave a scream, a scream that i shall never forget. i opened my eyes and saw that mouton had sprung at his face and was tearing the skin with his claws as if it had been a linen rag. and the blood was streaming down like rain, madame."i tried to take the cat away, but he held on tight, scratching all the time; and he bit me, he was so crazy. i finally got him and threw him out of the window, which was open, for it was summer."when i began to bathe my poor friend's face, i noticed that his eyes were destroyed, both his eyes!"he had to go to the hospital. he died of grief at the end of a year. i wanted to keep him with me and provide for him, but he would not agree to it. one would have supposed that he hated me after the occurrence."as for mouton, his back was broken by the fall, the janitor picked up his body. i had him stuffed, for in spite of all i was fond of him. if he acted as he did it was because he loved me, was it not?"the old woman was silent and began to stroke the lifeless animal whose body trembled on its iron framework.emma, with sorrowful heart, had forgotten about the predicted death--or, at least, she did not allude to it again, and she left, giving the woman five francs.as her husband was to return the following day, i did not go to the house for several days. when i did go i was surprised at not seeing misti. i asked where he was.she blushed and replied:"i gave him away. i was uneasy."i was astonished."uneasy? uneasy? what about?"she gave me a long kiss and said in a low tone:"i was uneasy about your eyes, my dear."madame julie roubere was expecting her elder sister, madame henriette letore, who had just returned from a trip to switzerland.the letore household had left nearly five weeks before. madame henriette had allowed her husband to return alone to their estate in calvados, where some business required his attention, and had come to spend a few days in paris with her sister. night came on. in the quiet parlor madame roubere was reading in the twilight in an absent-minded way, raising her eyes whenever she heard a sound.at last, she heard a ring at the door, and her sister appeared, wrapped in a travelling cloak. and without any formal greeting, they clasped each other in an affectionate embrace, only desisting for a moment to give each other another hug. then they talked about their health, about their respective families, and a thousand other things, gossiping, jerking out hurried, broken sentences as they followed each other about, while madame henriette was removing her hat and veil.it was now quite dark. madame roubere rang for a lamp, and as soon as it was brought in, she scanned her sister's face, and was on the point of embracing her once more. but she held back, scared and astonished at the other's appearance.on her temples madame letore had two large locks of white hair. all the rest of her hair was of a glossy, raven-black hue; but there alone, at each side of her head, ran, as it were, two silvery streams which were immediately lost in the black mass surrounding them. she was, nevertheless, only twenty-four years old, and this change had come on suddenly since her departure for switzerland.without moving, madame roubere gazed at her in amazement, tears rising to her eyes, as she thought that some mysterious and terrible calamity must have befallen her sister. she asked:"what is the matter with you, henriette?"smiling with a sad face, the smile of one who is heartsick, the other replied:"why, nothing, i assure you. were you noticing my white hair?"but madame roubere impetuously seized her by the shoulders, and with a searching glance at her, repeated:"what is the matter with you? tell me what is the matter with you. and if you tell me a falsehood, i'll soon find it out."they remained face to face, and madame henriette, who looked as if she were about to faint, had two pearly tears in the corners of her drooping eyes.her sister continued:"what has happened to you? what is the matter with you? answer me!"then, in a subdued voice, the other murmured:"i have--i have a lover."and, hiding her forehead on the shoulder of her younger sister, she sobbed.then, when she had grown a little calmer, when the heaving of her breast had subsided, she commenced to unbosom herself, as if to cast forth this secret from herself, to empty this sorrow of hers into a sympathetic heart.thereupon, holding each other's hands tightly clasped, the two women went over to a sofa in a dark corner of the room, into which they sank, and the younger sister, passing her arm over the elder one's neck, and drawing her close to her heart, listened."oh! i know that there was no excuse for me; i do not understand myself, and since that day i feel as if i were mad. be careful, my child, about yourself--be careful! if you only knew how weak we are, how quickly we yield, and fall. it takes so little, so little, so little, a moment of tenderness, one of those sudden fits of melancholy which come over you, one of those longings to open, your arms, to love, to cherish something, which we all have at certain moments."you know my husband, and you know how fond i am of him; but he is mature and sensible, and cannot even comprehend the tender vibrations of a woman's heart. he is always the same, always good, always smiling, always kind, always perfect. oh! how i sometimes have wished that he would clasp me roughly in his arms, that he would embrace me with those slow, sweet kisses which make two beings intermingle, which are like mute confidences! how i have wished that he were foolish, even weak, so that he should have need of me, of my caresses, of my tears!"this all seems very silly; but we women are made like that. how can we help it?"and yet the thought of deceiving him never entered my mind. now it has happened, without love, without reason, without anything, simply because the moon shone one night on the lake of lucerne."during the month when we were travelling together, my husband, with his calm indifference, paralyzed my enthusiasm, extinguished my poetic ardor. when we were descending the mountain paths at sunrise, when as the four horses galloped along with the diligence, we saw, in the transparent morning haze, valleys, woods, streams, and villages, i clasped my hands with delight, and said to him: 'how beautiful it is, dear! give me a kiss! kiss me now!' he only answered, with a smile of chilling kindliness: 'there is no reason why we should kiss each other because you like the landscape.'"and his words froze me to the heart. it seems to me that when people love each other, they ought to feel more moved by love than ever, in the presence of beautiful scenes."in fact, i was brimming over with poetry which he kept me from expressing. i was almost like a boiler filled with steam and hermetically sealed."one evening (we had for four days been staying in a hotel at fluelen) robert, having one of his sick headaches, went to bed immediately after dinner, and i went to take a walk all alone along the edge of the lake."it was a night such as one reads of in fairy tales. the full moon showed itself in the middle of the sky; the tall mountains, with their snowy crests, seemed to wear silver crowns; the waters of the lake glittered with tiny shining ripples. the air was mild, with that kind of penetrating warmth which enervates us till we are ready to faint, to be deeply affected without any apparent cause. but how sensitive, how vibrating the heart is at such moments! how quickly it beats, and how intense is its emotion!"i sat down on the grass, and gazed at that vast, melancholy, and fascinating lake, and a strange feeling arose in me; i was seized with an insatiable need of love, a revolt against the gloomy dullness of my life. what! would it never be my fate to wander, arm in arm, with a man i loved, along a moon-kissed bank like this? was i never to feel on my lips those kisses so deep, delicious, and intoxicating which lovers exchange on nights that seem to have been made by god for tenderness? was i never to know ardent, feverish love in the moonlit shadows of a summer's night?"and i burst out weeping like a crazy woman. i heard something stirring behind me. a man stood there, gazing at me. when i turned my head round, he recognized me, and, advancing, said:"'you are weeping, madame?'"it was a young barrister who was travelling with his mother, and whom we had often met. his eyes had frequently followed me."i was so confused that i did not know what answer to give or what to think of the situation. i told him i felt ill."he walked on by my side in a natural and respectful manner, and began talking to me about what we had seen during our trip. all that i had felt he translated into words; everything that made me thrill he understood perfectly, better than i did myself. and all of a sudden he repeated some verses of alfred de musset. i felt myself choking, seized with indescribable emotion. it seemed to me that the mountains themselves, the lake, the moonlight, were singing to me about things ineffably sweet."and it happened, i don't know how, i don't know why, in a sort of hallucination."as for him, i did not see him again till the morning of his departure."he gave me his card!"and, sinking into her sister's arms, madame letore broke into groans-- almost into shrieks.then, madame roubere, with a self-contained and serious air, said very gently:"you see, sister, very often it is not a man that we love, but love itself. and your real lover that night was the moonlight."she was one of those pretty and charming girls born,  as though fate had blundered over her, into a family of artisans. she had no marriage portion, no  expectations, no means of getting known, understood, loved, and wedded by a man of wealth and  distinction; and she let herself be married off to a little clerk in the ministry of education.   her tastes were simple because she had never been able to afford any other, but she was as  unhappy as though she had married beneath her; for women have no caste or class, their beauty,  grace, and charm serving them for birth or family. their natural delicacy, their instinctive elegance,  their nimbleness of wit, are their only mark of rank, and put the slum girl on a level with the highest  lady in the land.she suffered endlessly, feeling herself born for every delicacy and luxury. she suffered from the  poorness of her house, from its mean walls, worn chairs, and ugly curtains. all these things, of  which other women of her class would not even have been aware, tormented and insulted her. the  sight of the little breton girl who came to do the work in her little house aroused heart-broken  regrets and hopeless dreams in her mind. she imagined silent antechambers, heavy with oriental  tapestries, lit by torches in lofty bronze sockets, with two tall footmen in knee-breeches sleeping in  large arm-chairs, overcome by the heavy warmth of the stove. she imagined vast saloons hung with  antique silks, exquisite pieces of furniture supporting priceless ornaments, and small, charming,  perfumed rooms, created just for little parties of intimate friends, men who were famous and sought  after, whose homage roused every other woman's envious longings.when she sat down for dinner at the round table covered with a three-days-old cloth, opposite her  husband, who took the cover off the soup-tureen, exclaiming delightedly: "aha! scotch broth! what  could be better?" she imagined delicate meals, gleaming silver, tapestries peopling the walls with  folk of a past age and strange birds in faery forests; she imagined delicate food served in  marvellous dishes, murmured gallantries, listened to with an inscrutable smile as one trifled with  the rosy flesh of trout or wings of asparagus chicken.she had no clothes, no jewels, nothing. and these were the only things she loved; she felt that she  was made for them. she had longed so eagerly to charm, to be desired, to be wildly attractive and  sought after.she had a rich friend, an old school friend whom she refused to visit, because she suffered so  keenly when she returned home. she would weep whole days, with grief, regret, despair, and  misery.***one evening her husband came home with an exultant air, holding a large envelope in his hand." here's something for you," he said.swiftly she tore the paper and drew out a printed card on which were these words:"the minister of education and madame ramponneau request the pleasure of the company of  monsieur and madame loisel at the ministry on the evening of monday, january the 18th."instead of being delighted, as her-husband hoped, she flung the invitation petulantly across the  table, murmuring:"what do you want me to do with this?""why, darling, i thought you'd be pleased. you never go out, and this is a great occasion. i had  tremendous trouble to get it. every one wants one; it's very select, and very few go to the clerks. you'll see all the really big people there."she looked at him out of furious eyes, and said impatiently: "and what do you suppose i am to  wear at such an affair?"he had not thought about it; he stammered:"why, the dress you go to the theatre in. it looks very nice, to me...."he stopped, stupefied and utterly at a loss when he saw that his wife was beginning to cry. two  large tears ran slowly down from the corners of her eyes towards the corners of her mouth."what's the matter with you? what's the matter with you?" he faltered.but with a violent effort she overcame her grief and replied in a calm voice, wiping her wet cheeks:"nothing. only i haven't a dress and so i can't go to this party. give your invitation to some friend of  yours whose wife will be turned out better than i shall."he was heart-broken."look here, mathilde," he persisted. :what would be the cost of a suitable dress, which you could  use on other occasions as well, something very simple?"she thought for several seconds, reckoning up prices and also wondering for how large a sum she  could ask without bringing upon herself an immediate refusal and an exclamation of horror from the  careful-minded clerk.at last she replied with some hesitation:"i don't know exactly, but i think i could do it on four hundred francs."he grew slightly pale, for this was exactly the amount he had been saving for a gun, intending to  get a little shooting next summer on the plain of nanterre with some friends who went lark-shooting  there on sundays.nevertheless he said: "very well. i'll give you four hundred francs. but try and get a really nice  dress with the money."the day of the party drew near, and madame loisel seemed sad, uneasy and anxious. her dress  was ready, however. one evening her husband said to her:"what's the matter with you? you've been very odd for the last three days.""i'm utterly miserable at not having any jewels, not a single stone, to wear," she replied. "i shall  look absolutely no one. i would almost rather not go to the party.""wear flowers," he said. "they're very smart at this time of the year. for ten francs you could get  two or three gorgeous roses."she was not convinced."no . . . there's nothing so humiliating as looking poor in the middle of a lot of rich women.""how stupid you are!" exclaimed her husband. "go and see madame forestier and ask her to lend  you some jewels. you know her quite well enough for that."she uttered a cry of delight."that's true. i never thought of it."next day she went to see her friend and told her her trouble.madame forestier went to her dressing-table, took up a large box, brought it to madame loisel,  opened it, and said:"choose, my dear."first she saw some bracelets, then a pearl necklace, then a venetian cross in gold and gems, of  exquisite workmanship. she tried the effect of the jewels before the mirror, hesitating, unable to  make up her mind to leave them, to give them up. she kept on asking:"haven't you anything else?""yes. look for yourself. i don't know what you would like best."suddenly she discovered, in a black satin case, a superb diamond necklace; her heart began to  beat covetousiy. her hands trembled as she lifted it. she fastened it round her neck, upon her high  dress, and remained in ecstasy at sight of herself.then, with hesitation, she asked in anguish:"could you lend me this, just this alone?""yes, of course."she flung herself on her friend's breast, embraced her frenziedly, and went away with her treasure.   the day of the party arrived. madame loisel was a success. she was the prettiest woman present,  elegant, graceful, smiling, and quite above herself with happiness. all the men stared at her,  inquired her name, and asked to be introduced to her. all the under-secretaries of state were  eager to waltz with her. the minister noticed her.she danced madly, ecstatically, drunk with pleasure, with no thought for anything, in the triumph of  her beauty, in the pride of her success, in a cloud of happiness made up of this universal homage  and admiration, of the desires she had aroused, of the completeness of a victory so dear to her  feminine heart.she left about four o'clock in the morning. since midnight her husband had been dozing in a  deserted little room, in company with three other men whose wives were having a good time.   he threw over her shoulders the garments he had brought for them to go home in, modest everyday  clothes, whose poverty clashed with the beauty of the ball-dress. she was conscious of this and  was anxious to hurry away, so that she should not be noticed by the other women putting on their  costly furs.loisel restrained her."wait a little. you'll catch cold in the open. i'm going to fetch a cab."but she did not listen to him and rapidly descended-the staircase. when they were out in the street  they could not find a cab; they began to look for one, shouting at the drivers whom they saw  passing in the distance.they walked down towards the seine, desperate and shivering. at last they found on the quay one  of those old nightprowling carriages which are only to be seen in paris after dark, as though they  were ashamed of their shabbiness in the daylight.it brought them to their door in the rue des martyrs, and sadly they walked up to their own  apartment. it was the end, for her. as for him, he was thinking that he must be at the office at ten.she took off the garments in which she had wrapped her shoulders, so as to see herself in all her  glory before the mirror. but suddenly she uttered a cry. the necklace was no longer round her  neck!"what's the matter with you?" asked her husband, already half undressed.she turned towards him in the utmost distress."i . . . i . . . i've no longer got madame forestier's necklace. . . ."he started with astonishment."what! . . . impossible!"they searched in the folds of her dress, in the folds of the coat, in the pockets, everywhere. they  could not find it."are you sure that you still had it on when you came away from the ball?" he asked."yes, i touched it in the hall at the ministry.""but if you had lost it in the street, we should have heard it fall.""yes. probably we should. did you take the number of the cab?""no. you didn't notice it, did you?""no."they stared at one another, dumbfounded. at last loisel put on his clothes again."i'll go over all the ground we walked," he said, "and see if i can't find it."and he went out. she remained in her evening clothes, lacking strength to get into bed, huddled on  a chair, without volition or power of thought.her husband returned about seven. he had found nothing.he went to the police station, to the newspapers, to offer a reward, to the cab companies,  everywhere that a ray of hope impelled him.she waited all day long, in the same state of bewilderment at this fearful catastrophe.loisel came home at night, his face lined and pale; he had discovered nothing."you must write to your friend," he said, "and tell her that you've broken the clasp of her necklace  and are getting it mended. that will give us time to look about us."she wrote at his dictation.***by the end of a week they had lost all hope.loisel, who had aged five years, declared:"we must see about replacing the diamonds."next day they took the box which had held the necklace and went to the jewellers whose name  was inside. he consulted his books."it was not i who sold this necklace, madame; i must have merely supplied the clasp."then they went from jeweller to jeweller, searching for another necklace like the first, consulting  their memories, both ill with remorse and anguish of mind.in a shop at the palais-royal they found a string of diamonds which seemed to them exactly like  the one they were looking for. it was worth forty thousand francs. they were allowed to have it for  thirty-six thousand.they begged the jeweller not to sell it for three days. and they arranged matters on the  understanding that it would be taken back for thirty-four thousand francs, if the first one were found  before the end of february.loisel possessed eighteen thousand francs left to him by his father. he intended to borrow the rest.he did borrow it, getting a thousand from one man, five hundred from another, five louis here, three  louis there. he gave notes of hand, entered into ruinous agreements, did business with usurers and  the whole tribe of money-lenders. he mortgaged the whole remaining years of his existence, risked     his signature without even knowing it he could honour it, and, appalled at the agonising face of the  future, at the black misery about to fall upon him, at the prospect of every possible physical  privation and moral torture, he went to get the new necklace and put down upon the jeweller's  counter thirty-six thousand francs.when madame loisel took back the necklace to madame forestier, the latter said to her in a chilly  voice:"you ought to have brought it back sooner; i might have needed it."she did not, as her friend had feared, open the case. if she had noticed the substitution, what  would she have thought? what would she have said? would she not have taken her for a thief?***madame loisel came to know the ghastly life of abject poverty. from the very first she played her  part heroically. this fearful debt must be paid off. she would pay it. the servant was dismissed.  they changed their flat; they took a garret under the roof.she came to know the heavy work of the house, the hateful duties of the kitchen. she washed the  plates, wearing out her pink nails on the coarse pottery and the bottoms of pans. she washed the  dirty linen, the shirts and dish-cloths, and hung them out to dry on a string; every morning she took  the dustbin down into the street and carried up the water, stopping on each landing to get her  breath. and, clad like a poor woman, she went to the fruiterer, to the grocer, to the butcher, a  basket  on her arm, haggling, insulted, fighting for every wretched halfpenny of her money.every month notes had to be paid off, others renewed, time gained.her husband worked in the evenings at putting straight a merchant's accounts, and often at night  he did copying at twopence-halfpenny a page.and this life lasted ten years.at the end of ten years everything was paid off, everything, the usurer's charges and the  accumulation of superimposed interest.madame loisel looked old now. she had become like all the other strong, hard, coarse women of  poor households. her hair was badly done, her skirts were awry, her hands were red. she spoke in  a shrill voice, and the water slopped all over the floor when she scrubbed it. but sometimes, when  her husband was at the office, she sat down by the window and thought of that evening long ago, of  the ball at which she had been so beautiful and so much admired.what would have happened if she had never lost those jewels. who knows? who knows? how  strange life is, how fickle! how little is needed to ruin or to save!one sunday, as she had gone for a walk along the champs-elysees to freshen herself after the  labours of the week, she caught sight suddenly of a woman who was taking a child out for a walk. it  was madame forestier, still young, still beautiful, still attractive.madame loisel was conscious of some emotion. should she speak to her? yes, certainly. and  now that she had paid, she would tell her all. why not?she went up to her."good morning, jeanne."the other did not recognise her, and was surprised at being thus familiarly addressed by a poor  woman."but . . . madame . . ." she stammered. "i don't know . . . you must be making a mistake.""no . . . i am mathilde loisel."her friend uttered a cry."oh! . . . my poor mathilde, how you have changed! . . .""yes, i've had some hard times since i saw you last; and many sorrows . . . and all on your  account.""on my account! . . . how was that?""you remember the diamond necklace you lent me for the ball at the ministry?""yes. well?""well, i lost it.""how could you? why, you brought it back.""i brought you another one just like it. and for the last ten years we have been paying for it. you  realise it wasn't easy for us; we had no money. . . . well, it's paid for at last, and i'm glad indeed."madame forestier had halted."you say you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine?""yes. you hadn't noticed it? they were very much alike."and she smiled in proud and innocent happiness.madame forestier, deeply moved, took her two hands."oh, my poor mathilde! but mine was imitation. it was worth at the very most five hundred francs! . . . "in the office old mongilet was looked on as a "character." he was an old employee, a good-natured creature, who had never been outside paris but once in his life.it was the end of july, and we all went every sunday to roll in the grass, or bathe in the river in the country near by. asnieres, argenteuil, chatou, bougival, maisons, poissy, had their habitues and their ardent admirers. we argued about the merits and advantages of all these places, celebrated and delightful to all employees in paris.old mongilet would say:"you are like a lot of sheep! a nice place, this country you talk of!"and we would ask:"well, how about you, mongilet? don't you ever go on an excursion?""yes, indeed. i go in an omnibus. when i have had a good luncheon, without any hurry, at the wine shop below, i look up my route with a plan of paris and the time-table of the lines and connections. and then i climb up on top of the bus, open my umbrella and off we go. oh, i see lots of things, more than you, i bet! i change my surroundings. it is as though i were taking a journey across the world, the people are so different in one street and another. i know my paris better than anyone. and then, there is nothing more amusing than the entresols. you would not believe what one sees in there at a glance. one can guess a domestic scene simply by seeing the face of a man shouting; one is amused on passing by a barber's shop to see the barber leave his customer all covered with lather to look out in the street. one exchanges heartfelt glances with the milliners just for fun, as one has no time to alight. ah, how many things one sees!"it is the drama, real, true, natural drama that one sees as the horses trot by. heavens i i would not give my excursions in the omnibus for all your stupid excursions in the woods.""come and try it, mongilet, come to the country once just to see.""i was there once," he replied, "twenty years ago, and you will never catch me there again.""tell us about it, mongilet.""if you wish to hear it. this is how it was: you knew boivin, the old clerk, whom we called boileau?""yes, perfectly.""he was my office chum. the rascal had a house at colombes and always invited me to spend sunday with him. he would say:"'come alone, maculotte (he called me maculotte for fun). you will see what a nice walk we shall take.'"i let myself be trapped like an animal, and set out one morning by the eight o'clock train. i arrived at a kind of town, a country town where there is nothing to see, and i at length found my way to an old wooden door with an iron bell, at the end of an alley between two walls."i rang, and waited a long time, and at last the door was opened. what was it that opened it? i could not tell at the first glance. a woman or an ape? the creature was old, ugly, covered with old clothes that looked dirty and wicked. it had chickens' feathers in its hair and looked as though it would devour me."'what do you want?' she said."'m. boivin.'"'what do you want of him, of m. boivin?'"i felt ill at ease on being questioned by this fury. i stammered: 'why--he expects me.'"'ah, it is you who are coming to lunch?'"'yes,' i stammered, trembling."then, turning toward the house, she cried in an angry tone:"'boivin, here is your man!'"it was my friend's wife. little boivin appeared immediately on the threshold of a sort of barrack of plaster covered with zinc, that looked like a foot-warmer. he wore white duck trousers covered with stains and a dirty panama-hat."after shaking my hands warmly, he took me into what he called his garden. it was at the end of another alleyway enclosed by high walls and was a little square the size of a pockethandkerchief, surrounded by houses that were so high that the sun could reach it only two or three hours in the day. pansies, pinks, wallflowers and a few rose bushes were languishing in this airless well which was as hot as an oven from the refraction of heat from the roofs."'i have no trees,' said boivin, 'but the neighbours' walls take their place. i have as much shade as in a wood.'"then he took hold of a button of my coat and said in a low tone:"'you can do me a service. you saw the wife. she is not agreeable, eh? to-day, as i had invited you, she gave me clean clothes; but if i spot them all is lost. i counted on you to water my plants.'"i agreed. i took off my coat, rolled up my sleeves, and began to work the handle of a kind of pump that wheezed, puffed and rattled like a consumptive as it emitted a thread of water like a wallace drinking-fountain. it took me ten minutes to fill the watering-pot, and i was in a bath of perspiration. boivin directed me:"'here--this plant--a little more; enough--now this one.'"the watering-pot leaked and my feet got more water than the flowers. the bottoms of my trousers were soaking and covered with mud. and twenty times running i kept it up, soaking my feet afresh each time, and perspiring anew as i worked the handle of the pump. and when i was tired out and wanted to stop, boivin, in a tone of entreaty, said as he put his hand on my arm:"'just one more watering-potful--just one, and that will be all.'"to thank me he gave me a rose, a big rose, but hardly had it touched my buttonhole than it fell to pieces, leaving of my decoration only a hard little green knot. i was surprised, but said nothing."mme boivin's voice was heard in the distance: 'are you ever coming? i tell you lunch is ready!'"we went towards the foot-warmer. if the garden was in the shade, the house, on the other hand, was in the blazing sun, and the sweating-room of a turkish bath is not so hot as my friend's dining-room was."three plates, at the side of which were some half-washed forks, were placed in a table of yellow wood. in the middle stood an earthenware dish containing warmed-up boiled beef and potatoes. we began to eat."a large water-bottle full of water lightly coloured with wine attracted my attention. boivin, embarrassed, said to his wife:"'see here, my dear, just on a special occasion, are you not going to give us a little undiluted wine?'"she looked at him furiously."'so that you may both get tipsy, is that it, and stay here gabbing all day? a fine special occasion!'"he said no more. after the stew she brought in another dish of potatoes cooked with bacon. when this dish was finished, still in silence, she announced:"'that is all! now get out!'"boivin looked at her in astonishment."'but the pigeon--the pigeon you plucked this morning?'"she put her hands on her hips:"'perhaps you have not had enough? because you bring people here is no reason why we should devour all that there is in the house. what is there for me to eat this evening?'"we rose. boivin whispered:"'wait for me a second, and we will skip.'"he went into the kitchen where his wife had gone, and i overheard him say:"'give me twenty sous, my dear.'"'what do you want with twenty sous?'"'why, one does not know what may happen. it is always better to have some money.'"she yelled so that i should hear:"'no, i will not give it to you!as the man has had luncheon here, the least he can do is to pay your expenses for the day.'"boivin came back to fetch me. as i wished to be polite i bowed to the mistress of the house, stammering:"'madame--many thanks--kind welcome.'"'that's all right,' she replied. 'but do not bring him back drunk, for you will have to answer to me, you know!'"we set out. we had to cross a perfectly bare plain under the burning sun. i attempted to gather a flower along the road and gave a cry of pain. it had hurt my hand frightfully. they call these plants nettles. and, everywhere, there was a smell of manure, enough to turn your stomach."boivin said, 'have a little patience and we will reach the river bank.'"we reached the river. here there was an odour of mud and dirty water, and the sun blazed down on the water so that it burned my eyes. i begged boivin to go under cover somewhere. he took me into a kind of shanty filled with men, a river boatmen's tavern."he said:"'this does not look very grand, but it is very comfortable.'"i was hungry. i ordered an omelet. but lo and behold, at the second glass of wine, that cursed boivin lost his head, and i understand why his wife gave him water in his wine."he got up, declaimed, wanted to show his strength, interfered in a quarrel between two drunken men who were fighting, and, but for the landlord, who came to the rescue, we should both have been killed."i dragged him away, holding him up until we reached the first bush, where i deposited him. i lay down beside him and apparently i fell asleep. we must certainly have slept a long time, for it was dark when i awoke. boivin was snoring at my side. i shook him; he rose, but he was still drunk, though a little less so."we set out through the darkness across the plain. boivin said he knew the way. he made me turn to the left, then to the right, then to the left. we could see neither sky nor earth, and found ourselves lost in the midst of a kind of forest of wooden stakes, that came as high as our noses. it was a vineyard and these were the supports. there was not a single light on the horizon. we wandered about in this vineyard for about an hour or two, hesitating, reaching out our arms without coming to the end, for we kept retracing our steps."at length boivin fell against a stake that tore his cheek and he remained in a sitting posture on the ground, uttering with all his might long and resounding hellos, while i screamed 'help! help!' as loud as i could, lighting wax-matches to show the way to our rescuers, and also to keep up my courage."at last a belated peasant heard us and put us on our right road. i took boivin to his home, but as i was leaving him on the threshold of his garden, the door opened suddenly and his wife appeared, a candle in her hand. she frightened me horribly."as soon as she saw her husband, whom she must have been waiting for since dark, she screamed, as she darted toward me:"'ah, scoundrel, i knew you would bring him back drunk!'"my, how i made my escape, running all the way to the station, and as i thought the fury was pursuing me i shut myself in an inner room, as the train was not due for half an hour."that is why i never married, and why i never go out of paris."along all the roads around goderville the peasants and their wives were coming toward the burgh because it was market day. the men were proceeding with slow steps, the whole body bent forward at each movement of their long twisted legs; deformed by their hard work, by the weight on the plow which, at the same time, raised the left shoulder and swerved the figure, by the reaping of the wheat which made the knees spread to make a firm "purchase," by all the slow and painful labors of the country. their blouses, blue, "stiff-starched," shining as if varnished, ornamented with a little design in white at the neck and wrists, puffed about their bony bodies, seemed like balloons ready to carry them off. from each of them two feet protruded.some led a cow or a calf by a cord, and their wives, walking behind the animal, whipped its haunches with a leafy branch to hasten its progress. they carried large baskets on their arms from which, in some cases, chickens and, in others, ducks thrust out their heads. and they walked with a quicker, livelier step than their husbands. their spare straight figures were wrapped in a scanty little shawl pinned over their flat bosoms, and their heads were enveloped in a white cloth glued to the hair and surmounted by a cap.then a wagon passed at the jerky trot of a nag, shaking strangely, two men seated side by side and a woman in the bottom of the vehicle, the latter holding onto the sides to lessen the hard jolts.in the public square of goderville there was a crowd, a throng of human beings and animals mixed together. the horns of the cattle, the tall hats, with long nap, of the rich peasant and the headgear of the peasant women rose above the surface of the assembly. and the clamorous, shrill, screaming voices made a continuous and savage din which sometimes was dominated by the robust lungs of some countryman's laugh or the long lowing of a cow tied to the wall of a house.all that smacked of the stable, the dairy and the dirt heap, hay and sweat, giving forth that unpleasant odor, human and animal, peculiar to the people of the field.maître hauchecome of breaute had just arrived at goderville, and he was directing his steps toward the public square when he perceived upon the ground a little piece of string. maître hauchecome, economical like a true norman, thought that everything useful ought to be picked up, and he bent painfully, for he suffered from rheumatism. he took the bit of thin cord from the ground and began to roll it carefully when he noticed maître malandain, the harness maker, on the threshold of his door, looking at him. they had heretofore had business together on the subject of a halter, and they were on bad terms, both being good haters. maître hauchecome was seized with a sort of shame to be seen thus by his enemy, picking a bit of string out of the dirt. he concealed his "find" quickly under his blouse, then in his trousers' pocket; then he pretended to be still looking on the ground for something which he did not find, and he went toward the market, his head forward, bent double by his pains.he was soon lost in the noisy and slowly moving crowd which was busy with interminable bargainings. the peasants milked, went and came, perplexed, always in fear of being cheated, not daring to decide, watching the vender's eye, ever trying to find the trick in the man and the flaw in the beast.the women, having placed their great baskets at their feet, had taken out the poultry which lay upon the ground, tied together by the feet, with terrified eyes and scarlet crests.they heard offers, stated their prices with a dry air and impassive face, or perhaps, suddenly deciding on some proposed reduction, shouted to the customer who was slowly going away: "all right, maître authirne, i'll give it to you for that."then little by little the square was deserted, and the angelus ringing at noon, those who had stayed too long scattered to their shops.at jourdain's the great room was full of people eating, as the big court was full of vehicles of all kinds, carts, gigs, wagons, dumpcarts, yellow with dirt, mended and patched, raising their shafts to the sky like two arms or perhaps with their shafts in the ground and their backs in the air.just opposite the diners seated at the table the immense fireplace, filled with bright flames, cast a lively heat on the backs of the row on the right. three spits were turning on which were chickens, pigeons and legs of mutton, and an appetizing odor of roast beef and gravy dripping over the nicely browned skin rose from the hearth, increased the jovialness and made everybody's mouth water.all the aristocracy of the plow ate there at maître jourdain's, tavern keeper and horse dealer, a rascal who had money.the dishes were passed and emptied, as were the jugs of yellow cider. everyone told his affairs, his purchases and sales. they discussed the crops. the weather was favorable for the green things but not for the wheat.suddenly the drum beat in the court before the house. everybody rose, except a few indifferent persons, and ran to the door or to the windows, their mouths still full and napkins in their hands.after the public crier had ceased his drumbeating he called out in a jerky voice, speaking his phrases irregularly:"it is hereby made known to the inhabitants of goderville, and in general to all persons present at the market, that there was lost this morning on the road to benzeville, between nine and ten o'clock, a black leather pocketbook containing five hundred francs and some business papers. the finder is requested to return same with all haste to the mayor's office or to maître fortune houlbreque of manneville; there will be twenty francs reward."then the man went away. the heavy roll of the drum and the crier's voice were again heard at a distance.then they began to talk of this event, discussing the chances that maître houlbreque had of finding or not finding his pocketbook.and the meal concluded. they were finishing their coffee when a chief of the gendarmes appeared upon the threshold.he inquired:"is maître hauchecome of breaute here?"maître hauchecome, seated at the other end of the table, replied:"here i am."and the officer resumed:"maître hauchecome, will you have the goodness to accompany me to the mayor's office? the mayor would like to talk to you."the peasant, surprised and disturbed, swallowed at a draught his tiny glass of brandy, rose and, even more bent than in the morning, for the first steps after each rest were specially difficult, set out, repeating: "here i am, here i am."the mayor was awaiting him, seated on an armchair. he was the notary of the vicinity, a stout, serious man with pompous phrases."maître hauchecome," said he, "you were seen this morning to pick up, on the road to benzeville, the pocketbook lost by maître houlbreque of manneville."the countryman, astounded, looked at the mayor, already terrified by this suspicion resting on him without his knowing why."me? me? me pick up the pocketbook?""yes, you yourself.""word of honor, i never heard of it.""but you were seen.""i was seen, me? who says he saw me?""monsieur malandain, the harness maker."the old man remembered, understood and flushed with anger."ah, he saw me, the clodhopper, he saw me pick up this string here, m'sieu the mayor." and rummaging in his pocket, he drew out the little piece of string.but the mayor, incredulous, shook his head."you will not make me believe, maître hauchecome, that monsieur malandain, who is a man worthy of credence, mistook this cord for a pocketbook."the peasant, furious, lifted his hand, spat at one side to attest his honor, repeating:"it is nevertheless the truth of the good god, the sacred truth, m'sieu the mayor. i repeat it on my soul and my salvation."the mayor resumed:"after picking up the object you stood like a stilt, looking a long while in the mud to see if any piece of money had fallen out."the good old man choked with indignation and fear."how anyone can tell--how anyone can tell--such lies to take away an honest man's reputation! how can anyone---"there was no use in his protesting; nobody believed him.  he was con.fronted with monsieur malandain, who repeated and maintained his affirmation. they abused each other for an hour. at his own request maître hauchecome was searched; nothing was found on him.finally the mayor, very much perplexed, discharged him with the warning that he would consult the public prosecutor and ask for further orders.the news had spread. as he left the mayor's office the old man was sun rounded and questioned with a serious or bantering curiosity in which there was no indignation. he began to tell the story of the string. no one believed him. they laughed at him.he went along, stopping his friends, beginning endlessly his statement and his protestations, showing his pockets turned inside out to prove that he had nothing.they said:"old rascal, get out!"and he grew angry, becoming exasperated, hot and distressed at notbeing believed, not knowing what to do and always repeating himself.night came. he must depart. he started on his way with three neighbors to whom he pointed out the place where he had picked up the bit of string, and all along the road he spoke of his adventure.in the evening he took a turn in the village of breaute in order to tell it to everybody. he only met with incredulity.it made him ill at night.the next day about one o'clock in the afternoon marius paumelle, a hired man in the employ of maître breton, husbandman at ymanville, returned the pocketbook and its contents to maître houlbreque of manneville.this man claimed to have found the object in the road, but not knowing how to read, he had carried it to the house and given it to his employer.the news spread through the neighborhood. maître hauchecome was informed of it. he immediately went the circuit and began to recount his story completed by the happy climax. he was in triumph."what grieved me so much was not the thing itself as the lying. there is nothing so shameful as to be placed under a cloud on account of a lie."he talked of his adventure all day long; he told it on the highway to people who were passing by, in the wineshop to people who were drinking there and to persons coming out of church the following sunday. he stopped strangers to tell them about it. he was calm now, and yet something disturbed him without his knowing exactly what it was. people had the air of joking while they listened. they did not seem convinced. he seemed to feel that remarks were being made behind his back.on tuesday of the next week he went to the market at goderville, urged solely by the necessity he felt of discussing the case.malandain, standing at his door, began to laugh on seeing him pass. why?he approached a farmer from crequetot who did not let him finish and, giving him a thump in the stomach, said to his face:"you big rascal."then he turned his back on him.maître hauchecome was confused; why was he called a big rascal?when he was seated at the table in jourdain's tavern he commenced to explain "the affair."a horse dealer from monvilliers called to him:"come, come, old sharper, that's an old trick; i know all about your piece of string!"hauchecome stammered:"but since the pocketbook was found."but the other man replied:"shut up, papa, there is one that finds and there is one that reports. at any rate you are mixed with it."the peasant stood choking. he understood. they accused him of having had the pocketbook returned by a confederate, by an accomplice.he tried to protest. all the table began to laugh.he could not finish his dinner and went away in the midst of jeers.he went home ashamed and indignant, choking with anger and confusion, the more dejected that he was capable, with his norman cunning, of doing what they had accused him of and ever boasting of it as of a good turn. his innocence to him, in a confused way, was impossible to prove, as his sharpness was known. and he was stricken to the heart by the injustice of the suspicion.then he began to recount the adventures again, prolonging his history every day, adding each time new reasons, more energetic protestations, more solemn oaths which he imagined and prepared in his hours of solitude, his whole mind given up to the story of the string. he was believed so much the less as his defense was more complicated and his arguing more subtile."those are lying excuses," they said behind his back.he felt it, consumed his heart over it and wore himself out with useless efforts. he wasted away before their very eyes.the wags now made him tell about the string to amuse them, as they make a soldier who has been on a campaign tell about his battles. his mind, touched to the depth, began to weaken.toward the end of december he took to his bed.he died in the first days of january, and in the delirium of his death struggles he kept claiming his innocence, reiterating:"a piece of string, a piece of string--look--here it is, m'sieu the mayor."i"here, my friend," i said to labarbe, "you have just repeated those five words, that pig of a morin. why on earth do i never hear morin's name mentioned without his being called a pig?"labarbe, who is a deputy, looked at me with his owl-like eyes and said: "do you mean to say that you do not know morin's story and you come from la rochelle?" i was obliged to declare that i did not know morin's story, so labarbe rubbed his hands and began his recital."you knew morin, did you not, and you remember his large linen-draper's shop on the quai de la rochelle?""yes, perfectly.""well, then. you must know that in 1862 or '63 morin went to spend a fortnight in paris for pleasure; or for his pleasures, but under the pretext of renewing his stock, and you also know what a fortnight in paris means to a country shopkeeper; it fires his blood. the theatre every evening, women's dresses rustling up against you and continual excitement; one goes almost mad with it. one sees nothing but dancers in tights, actresses in very low dresses, round legs, fat shoulders, all nearly within reach of one's hands, without daring, or being able, to touch them, and one scarcely tastes food. when one leaves the city one's heart is still all in a flutter and one's mind still exhilarated by a sort of longing for kisses which tickles one's lips."morin was in that condition when he took his ticket for la rochelle by the eight-forty night express. as he was walking up and down the waiting-room at the station he stopped suddenly in front of a young lady who was kissing an old one. she had her veil up, and morin murmured with delight: 'by jove what a pretty woman!'"when she had said 'good-by' to the old lady she went into the waiting-room, and morin followed her; then she went on the platform and morin still followed her; then she got into an empty carriage, and he again followed her. there were very few travellers on the express. the engine whistled and the train started. they were alone. morin devoured her with his eyes. she appeared to be about nineteen or twenty and was fair, tall, with a bold look. she wrapped a railway rug round her and stretched herself on the seat to sleep."morin asked himself: 'i wonder who she is?' and a thousand conjectures, a thousand projects went through his head. he said to himself: 'so many adventures are told as happening on railway journeys that this may be one that is going to present itself to me. who knows? a piece of good luck like that happens very suddenly, and perhaps i need only be a little venturesome. was it not danton who said: "audacity, more audacity and always audacity"? if it was not danton it was mirabeau, but that does not matter. but then i have no audacity, and that is the difficulty. oh! if one only knew, if one could only read people's minds! i will bet that every day one passes by magnificent opportunities without knowing it, though a gesture would be enough to let me know her mind.'"then he imagined to himself combinations which conducted him to triumph. he pictured some chivalrous deed or merely some slight service which he rendered her, a lively, gallant conversation which ended in a declaration."but he could find no opening, had no pretext, and he waited for some fortunate circumstance, with his heart beating and his mind topsy-turvy. the night passed and the pretty girl still slept, while morin was meditating his own fall. the day broke and soon the first ray of sunlight appeared in the sky, a long, clear ray which shone on the face of the sleeping girl and woke her. she sat up, looked at the country, then at morin and smiled. she smiled like a happy woman, with an engaging and bright look, and morin trembled. certainly that smile was intended for him; it was discreet invitation, the signal which he was waiting for. that smile meant to say: 'how stupid, what a ninny, what a dolt, what a donkey you are, to have sat there on your seat like a post all night!''just look at me, am i not charming? and you have sat like that for the whole night, when you have been alone with a pretty woman, you great simpleton!'"she was still smiling as she looked at him; she even began to laugh; and he lost his head trying to find something suitable to say, no matter what. but he could think of nothing, nothing, and then, seized with a coward's courage, he said to himself:'so much the worse, i will risk everything,' and suddenly, without the slightest warning, he went toward her, his arms extended, his lips protruding, and, seizing her in his arms, he kissed her."she sprang up immediately with a bound, crying out: 'help! help!' and screaming with terror; and then she opened the carriage door and waved her arm out, mad with terror and trying to jump out, while morin, who was almost distracted and feeling sure that she would throw herself out, held her by the skirt and stammered: 'oh, madame! oh, madame!'"the train slackened speed and then stopped. two guards rushed up at the young woman's frantic signals. she threw herself into their arms, stammering: 'that man wanted--wanted--to--to--' and then she fainted."they were at mauze station, and the gendarme on duty arrested morin. when the victim of his indiscreet admiration had regained her consciousness, she made her charge against him, and the police drew it up. the poor linen draper did not reach home till night, with a prosecution hanging over him for an outrage to morals in a public place.ii"at that time i was editor of the fanal des charentes, and i used to meet morin every day at the cafe du commerce, and the day after his adventure. he came to see me, as he did not know what to do. i did not hide my opinion from him, but said to him: 'you are no better than a pig. no decent man behaves like that.'"he cried. his wife had given him a beating, and he foresaw his trade ruined, his name dragged through the mire and dishonored, his friends scandalized and taking no notice of him. in the end he excited my pity, and i sent for my colleague, rivet, a jocular but very sensible little man, to give us his advice."he advised me to see the public prosecutor, who was a friend of mine, and so i sent morin home and went to call on the magistrate. he told me that the woman who had been insulted was a young lady, mademoiselle henriette bonnel, who had just received her certificate as governess in paris and spent her holidays with her uncle and aunt, who were very respectable tradespeople in mauze. what made morin's case all the more serious was that the uncle had lodged a complaint, but the public official had consented to let the matter drop if this complaint were withdrawn, so we must try and get him to do this."i went back to morin's and found him in bed, ill with excitement and distress. his wife, a tall raw-boned woman with a beard, was abusing him continually, and she showed me into the room, shouting at me: 'so you have come to see that pig of a morin. well, there he is, the darling!' and she planted herself in front of the bed, with her hands on her hips. i told him how matters stood, and he begged me to go and see the girl's uncle and aunt. it was a delicate mission, but i undertook it, and the poor devil never ceased repeating: 'i assure you i did not even kiss her; no, not even that. i will take my oath to it!'"i replied: 'it is all the same; you are nothing but a pig.' and i took a thousand francs which he gave me to employ as i thought best, but as i did not care to venture to her uncle's house alone, i begged rivet to go with me, which he agreed to do on condition that we went immediately, for he had some urgent business at la rochelle that afternoon. so two hours later we rang at the door of a pretty country house. an attractive girl came and opened the door to us assuredly the young lady in question, and i said to rivet in a low voice: 'confound it! i begin to understand morin!'"the uncle, monsieur tonnelet, subscribed to the fanal, and was a fervent political coreligionist of ours. he received us with open arms and congratulated us and wished us joy; he was delighted at having the two editors in his house, and rivet whispered to me: 'i think we shall be able to arrange the matter of that pig of a morin for him.'"the niece had left the room and i introduced the delicate subject. i waved the spectre of scandal before his eyes; i accentuated the inevitable depreciation which the young lady would suffer if such an affair became known, for nobody would believe in a simple kiss, and the good man seemed undecided, but he could not make up his mind about anything without his wife, who would not be in until late that evening. but suddenly he uttered an exclamation of triumph: 'look here, i have an excellent idea; i will keep you here to dine and sleep, and when my wife comes home i hope we shall be able to arrange matters:"rivet resisted at first, but the wish to extricate that pig of a morin decided him, and we accepted the invitation, and the uncle got up radiant, called his niece and proposed that we should take a stroll in his grounds, saying: 'we will leave serious matters until the morning.' rivet and he began to talk politics, while i soon found myself lagging a little behind with 'the girl who was really charming--charming--and with the greatest precaution i began to speak to her about her adventure and try to make her my ally. she did not, however, appear the least confused, and listened to me like a person who was enjoying the whole thing very much."i said to her: 'just think, mademoiselle, how unpleasant it will be for you. you will have to appear in court, to encounter malicious looks, to speak before everybody and to recount that unfortunate occurrence in the railway carriage in public. do you not think, between ourselves, that it would have been much better for you to have put that dirty scoundrel back in his place without calling for assistance, and merely to change your carriage?' she began to laugh and replied: 'what you say is quite true, but what could i do? i was frightened, and when one is frightened one does not stop to reason with one's self. as soon as i realized the situation i was very sorry, that i had called out, but then it was too late. you must also remember that the idiot threw himself upon me like a madman, without saying a word and looking like a lunatic. i did not even know what he wanted of me.'"she looked me full in the face without being nervous or intimidated and i said to myself: 'she is a queer sort of girl, that: i can quite see how that pig morin came to make a mistake,' and i went on jokingly: 'come, mademoiselle, confess that he was excusable, for, after all, a man cannot find himself opposite such a pretty girl as you are without feeling a natural desire to kiss her.'"she laughed more than ever and showed her teeth and said: 'between the desire and the act, monsieur, there is room for respect.' it was an odd expression to use, although it was not very clear, and i asked abruptly: 'well, now, suppose i were to kiss you, what would you do?' she stopped to look at me from head to foot and then said calmly: 'oh, you? that is quite another matter.'"i knew perfectly well, by jove, that it was not the same thing at all, as everybody in the neighborhood called me 'handsome labarbe'--i was thirty years old in those days--but i asked her: 'and why, pray?' she shrugged her shoulders and replied: 'well! because you are not so stupid as he is.' and then she added, looking at me slyly: 'nor so ugly, either: and before she could make a movement to avoid me i had implanted a hearty kiss on her cheek. she sprang aside, but it was too late, and then she said: 'well, you are not very bashful, either! but don't do that sort of thing again.'"i put on a humble look and said in a low voice: 'oh, mademoiselle! as for me, if i long for one thing more than another it is to be summoned before a magistrate for the same reason as morin.'"'why?' she asked. and, looking steadily at her, i replied: 'because you are one of the most beautiful creatures living; because it would be an honor and a glory for me to have wished to offer you violence, and because people would have said, after seeing you: "well, labarbe has richly deserved what he has got, but he is a lucky fellow, all the same.'""she began to laugh heartily again and said: 'how funny you are!' and she had not finished the word 'funny' before i had her in my arms and was kissing her ardently wherever i could find a place, on her forehead, on her eyes, on her lips occasionally, on her cheeks, all over her head, some part of which she was obliged to leave exposed, in spite of herself, to defend the others; but at last she managed to release herself, blushing and angry. 'you are very unmannerly, monsieur,' she said, 'and i am sorry i listened to you.'"i took her hand in some confusion and stammered out: 'i beg your pardon. i beg your pardon, mademoiselle. i have offended you; i have acted like a brute! do not be angry with me for what i have done. if you knew--' i vainly sought for some excuse, and in a few moments she said: 'there is nothing for me to know, monsieur.' but i had found something to say, and i cried: 'mademoiselle, i love you!'"she was really surprised and raised her eyes to look at me, and i went on: 'yes, mademoiselle, and pray listen to me. i do not know morin, and i do not care anything about him. it does not matter to me the least if he is committed for trial and locked up meanwhile. i saw you here last year, and i was so taken with you that the thought of you has never left me since, and it does not matter to me whether you believe me or not. i thought you adorable, and the remembrance of you took such a hold on me that i longed to see you again, and so i made use of that fool morin as a pretext, and here i am. circumstances have made me exceed the due limits of respect, and i can only beg you to pardon me.'"she looked at me to see if i was in earnest and was ready to smile again. then she murmured: 'you humbug!' but i raised my hand and said in a sincere voice (and i really believe that i was sincere): 'i swear to you that i am speaking the truth,' and she replied quite simply: 'don't talk nonsense!'"we were alone, quite alone, as rivet and her uncle had disappeared down a sidewalk, and i made her a real declaration of love, while i squeezed and kissed her hands, and she listened to it as to something new and agreeable, without exactly knowing how much of it she was to believe, while in the end i felt agitated, and at last really myself believed what i said. i was pale, anxious and trembling, and i gently put my arm round her waist and spoke to her softly, whispering into the little curls over her ears. she seemed in a trance, so absorbed in thought was she."then her hand touched mine, and she pressed it, and i gently squeezed her waist with a trembling, and gradually firmer, grasp. she did not move now, and i touched her cheek with my lips, and suddenly without seeking them my lips met hers. it was a long, long kiss, and it would have lasted longer still if i had not heard a hm! hm! just behind me, at which she made her escape through the bushes, and turning round i saw rivet coming toward me, and, standing in the middle of the path, he said without even smiling: 'so that is the way you settle the affair of that pig of a morin.' and i replied conceitedly: 'one does what one can, my dear fellow. but what about the uncle? how have you got on with him? i will answer for the niece.' 'i have not been so fortunate with him,' he replied."whereupon i took his arm and we went indoors."iii"dinner made me lose my head altogether. i sat beside her, and my hand continually met hers under the tablecloth, my foot touched hers and our glances met."after dinner we took a walk by moonlight, and i whispered all the tender things i could think of to her. i held her close to me, kissed her every moment, while her uncle and rivet were arguing as they walked in front of us. they went in, and soon a messenger brought a telegram from her aunt, saying that she would not return until the next morning at seven o'clock by the first train."'very well, henriette,' her uncle said, 'go and show the gentlemen their rooms.' she showed rivet his first, and he whispered to me: 'there was no danger of her taking us into yours first.' then she took me to my room, and as soon as she was alone with me i took her in my arms again and tried to arouse her emotion, but when she saw the danger she escaped out of the room, and i retired very much put out and excited and feeling rather foolish, for i knew that i should not sleep much, and i was wondering how i could have committed such a mistake, when there was a gentle knock at my door, and on my asking who was there a low voice replied: 'i'"i dressed myself quickly and opened the door, and she came in. 'i forgot to ask you what you take in the morning,' she said; 'chocolate, tea or coffee?' i put my arms round her impetuously and said, devouring her with kisses: 'i will take--i will take--'"but she freed herself from my arms, blew out my candle and disappeared and left me alone in the dark, furious, trying to find some matches, and not able to do so. at last i got some and i went into the passage, feeling half mad, with my candlestick in my hand."what was i about to do? i did not stop to reason, i only wanted to find her, and i would. i went a few steps without reflecting, but then i suddenly thought: 'suppose i should walk into the uncle's room what should i say?' and i stood still, with my head a void and my heart beating. but in a few moments i thought of an answer: 'of course, i shall say that i was looking for rivet's room to speak to him about an important matter,' and i began to inspect all the doors, trying to find hers, and at last i took hold of a handle at a venture, turned it and went in. there was henriette, sitting on her bed and looking at me in tears. so i gently turned the key, and going up to her on tiptoe i said: 'i forgot to ask you for something to read, mademoiselle.'"i was stealthily returning to my room when a rough hand seized me and a voice--it was rivet's -whispered in my ear: 'so you have not yet quite settled that affair of morin's?'"at seven o'clock the next morning henriette herself brought me a cup of chocolate. i never have drunk anything like it, soft, velvety, perfumed, delicious. i could hardly take away my lips from the cup, and she had hardly left the room when rivet came in. he seemed nervous and irritable, like a man who had not slept, and he said to me crossly:'if you go on like this you will end by spoiling the affair of that pig of a morin!'"at eight o'clock the aunt arrived. our discussion was very short, for they withdrew their complaint, and i left five hundred francs for the poor of the town. they wanted to keep us for the day, and they arranged an excursion to go and see some ruins. henriette made signs to me to stay, behind her parents' back, and i accepted, but rivet was determined to go, and though i took him aside and begged and prayed him to do this for me, he appeared quite exasperated and kept saying to me: 'i have had enough of that pig of a morin's affair, do you hear?'"of course i was obliged to leave also, and it was one of the hardest moments of my life. i could have gone on arranging that business as long as i lived, and when we were in the railway carriage, after shaking hands with her in silence, i said to rivet: 'you are a mere brute!' and he replied: 'my dear fellow, you were beginning to annoy me confoundedly.'"on getting to the fanal office, i saw a crowd waiting for us, and as soon as they saw us they all exclaimed: 'well, have you settled the affair of that pig of a morin?' all la rochelle was excited about it, and rivet, who had got over his ill-humor on the journey, had great difficulty in keeping himself from laughing as he said: 'yes, we have managed it, thanks to labarbe: and we went to morin's."he was sitting in an easy-chair with mustard plasters on his legs and cold bandages on his head, nearly dead with misery. he was coughing with the short cough of a dying man, without any one knowing how he had caught it, and his wife looked at him like a tigress ready to eat him, and as soon as he saw us he trembled so violently as to make his hands and knees shake, so i said to him immediately: 'it is all settled, you dirty scamp, but don't do such a thing again.'"he got up, choking, took my hands and kissed them as if they had belonged to a prince, cried, nearly fainted, embraced rivet and even kissed madame morin, who gave him such a push as to send him staggering back into his chair; but he never got over the blow; his mind had been too much upset. in all the country round, moreover, he was called nothing but 'that pig of a morin,' and that epithet went through him like a sword-thrust every time he heard it. when a street boy called after him 'pig!' he turned his head instinctively. his friends also overwhelmed him with horrible jokes and used to ask him, whenever they were eating ham, 'is it a bit of yourself?' he died two years later."as for myself, when i was a candidate for the chamber of deputies in 1875, i called on the new notary at fousserre, monsieur belloncle, to solicit his vote, and a tall, handsome and evidently wealthy lady received me. 'you do not know me again?' she said. and i stammered out: 'why--no--madame.' 'henriette bonnel.' 'ah!' and i felt myself turning pale, while she seemed perfectly at her ease and looked at me with a smile."as soon as she had left me alone with her husband he took both my hands, and, squeezing them as if he meant to crush them, he said: 'i have been intending to go and see you for a long time, my dear sir, for my wife has very often talked to me about you. i know--yes, i know under what painful circumstances you made her acquaintance, and i know also how perfectly you behaved, how full of delicacy, tact and devotion you showed yourself in the affair--' he hesitated and then said in a lower tone, as if he had been saying something low and coarse, 'in the affair of that pig of a morin.'"when sabot entered the inn at martinville it was a signal for laughter. what a rogue he was, this sabot! there was a man who did not like priests, for instance! oh, no, oh, no! he did not spare them, the scamp.sabot (theodule), a master carpenter, represented liberal thought in martinville. he was a tall, thin, than, with gray, cunning eyes, and thin lips, and wore his hair plastered down on his temples. when he said: "our holy father, the pope" in a certain manner, everyone laughed. he made a point of working on sunday during the hour of mass. he killed his pig each year on monday in holy week in order to have enough black pudding to last till easter, and when the priest passed by, he always said by way of a joke: "there goes one who has just swallowed his god off a salver."the priest, a stout man and also very tall, dreaded him on account of his boastful talk which attracted followers. the abbe maritime was a politic man, and believed in being diplomatic. there had been a rivalry between them for ten years, a secret, intense, incessant rivalry. sabot was municipal councillor, and they thought he would become mayor, which would inevitably mean the final overthrow of the church.the elections were about to take place. the church party was shaking in its shoes in martinville.one morning the cure set out for rouen, telling his servant that he was going to see the archbishop. he returned in two days with a joyous, triumphant air. and everyone knew the following day that the chancel of the church was going to be renovated. a sum of six hundred francs had been contributed by the archbishop out of his private fund. all the old pine pews were to be removed, and replaced by new pews made of oak. it would be a big carpentering job, and they talked about it that very evening in all the houses in the village.theodule sabot was not laughing.when he went through the village the following morning, the neighbors, friends and enemies, all asked him, jokingly:"are you going to do the work on the chancel of the church?"he could find nothing to say, but he was furious, he was good and angry.ill-natured people added:"it is a good piece of work; and will bring in not less than two or three per cent. profit."two days later, they heard that the work of renovation had been entrusted to celestin chambrelan, the carpenter from percheville. then this was denied, and it was said that all the pews in the church were going to be changed. that would be well worth the two thousand francs that had been demanded of the church administration.theodule sabot could not sleep for thinking about it. never, in all the memory of man, had a country carpenter undertaken a similar piece of work. then a rumor spread abroad that the cure felt very grieved that he had to give this work to a carpenter who was a stranger in the community, but that sabot's opinions were a barrier to his being entrusted with the job.sabot knew it well. he called at the parsonage just as it was growing dark. the servant told him that the cure was at church. he went to the church.two attendants on the altar of the virgin, two soar old maids, were decorating the altar for the month of mary, under the direction of the priest, who stood in the middle of the chancel with his portly paunch, directing the two women who, mounted on chairs, were placing flowers around the tabernacle.sabot felt ill at ease in there, as though he were in the house of his greatest enemy, but the greed of gain was gnawing at his heart. he drew nearer, holding his cap in his hand, and not paying any attention to the "demoiselles de la vierge," who remained standing startled, astonished, motionless on their chairs.he faltered:"good morning, monsieur le cure."the priest replied without looking at him, all occupied as he was with the altar:"good morning, mr. carpenter.'sabot, nonplussed, knew not what to say next. but after a pause he remarked:"you are making preparations?"abbe maritime replied:"yes, we are near the month of mary.""why, why," remarked sabot and then was silent. he would have liked to retire now without saying anything, but a glance at the chancel held him back. he saw sixteen seats that had to be remade, six to the right and eight to the left, the door of the sacristy occupying the place of two. sixteen oak seats, that would be worth at most three hundred francs, and by figuring carefully one might certainly make two hundred francs on the work if one were not clumsy.then he stammered out:"i have come about the work."the cure appeared surprised. he asked:"what work?""the work to be done," murmured sabot, in dismay.then the priest turned round and looking him straight in the eyes, said:"do you mean the repairs in the chancel of my church?"at the tone of the abbe, theodule sabot felt a chill run down his back and he once more had a longing to take to his heels. however, he replied humbly:"why, yes, monsieur le cure."then the abbe folded his arms across his large stomach and, as if filled with amazement, said:"is it you--you--you, sabot--who have come to ask me for this . . . you--the only irreligious man in my parish! why, it would be a scandal, a public scandal! the archbishop would give me a reprimand, perhaps transfer me."he stopped a few seconds, for breath, and then resumed in a calmer tone: "i can understand that it pains you to see a work of such importance entrusted to a carpenter from a neighboring parish. but i cannot do otherwise, unless--but no--it is impossible--you would not consent, and unless you did, never."sabot now looked at the row of benches in line as far as the entrance door. christopher, if they were going to change all those!and he asked:"what would you require of me? tell me."the priest, in a firm tone replied:"i must have an extraordinary token of your good intentions.""i do not say--i do not say; perhaps we might come to an understanding," faltered sabot."you will have to take communion publicly at high mass next sunday," declared the cure.the carpenter felt he was growing pale, and without replying, he asked:"and the benches, are they going to be renovated?"the abbe replied with confidence:"yes, but later on."sabot resumed:"i do not say, i do not say. i am not calling it off, i am consenting to religion, for sure. but what rubs me the wrong way is, putting it in practice; but in this case i will not be refractory."the attendants of the virgin, having got off their chairs had concealed themselves behind the altar; and they listened pale with emotion.the cure, seeing he had gained the victory, became all at once very friendly, quite familiar."that is good, that is good. that was wisely said, and not stupid, you understand. you will see, you will see."sabot smiled and asked with an awkward air:"would it not be possible to put off this communion just a trifle?"but the priest replied, resuming his severe expression:"from the moment that the work is put into your hands, i want to be assured of your conversion."then he continued more gently:"you will come to confession to-morrow; for i must examine you at least twice.""twice?" repeated sabot."yes."the priest smiled."you understand perfectly that you must have a general cleaning up, a thorough cleansing. so i will expect you to-morrow."the carpenter, much agitated, asked:"where do you do that?""why--in the confessional.""in--that box, over there in the corner? the fact is--is--that it does not suit me, your box.""how is that?""seeing that--seeing that i am not accustomed to that, and also i am rather hard of hearing."the cure was very affable and said:"well, then! you shall come to my house and into my parlor. we will have it just the two of us, tete-a-tete. does that suit you?""yes, that is all right, that will suit me, but your box, no.""well, then, to-morrow after the days work, at six o'clock.""that is understood, that is all right, that is agreed on. to-morrow, monsieur le cure. whoever draws back is a skunk!"and he held out his great rough hand which the priest grasped heartily with a clap that resounded through the church.theodule sabot was not easy in his mind all the following day. he had a feeling analogous to the apprehension one experiences when a tooth has to be drawn. the thought recurred to him at every moment: "i must go to confession this evening." and his troubled mind, the mind of an atheist only half convinced, was bewildered with a confused and overwhelming dread of the divine mystery.as soon as he had finished his work, he betook himself to the parsonage. the cure was waiting for him in the garden, reading his breviary as he walked along a little path. he appeared radiant and greeted him with a good-natured laugh."well, here we are! come in, come in, monsieur sabot, no one will eat you."and sabot preceded him into the house. he faltered:"if you do not mind i should like to get through with this little matter at once."the cure replied:"i am at your service. i have my surplice here. one minute and i will listen to you."the carpenter, so disturbed that he had not two ideas in his head, watched him as he put on the white vestment with its pleated folds. the priest beckoned to him and said:"kneel down on this cushion."sabot remained standing, ashamed of having to kneel. he stuttered:"is it necessary?"but the abbe had become dignified."you cannot approach the penitent bench except on your knees."and sabot knelt down."repeat the confiteor," said the priest."what is that?" asked sabot."the confiteor. if you do not remember it, repeat after me, one by one, the words i am going to say." and the cure repeated the sacred prayer, in a slow tone, emphasizing the words which the carpenter repeated after him. then he said:"now make your confession."but sabot was silent, not knowing where to begin. the abbe then came to his aid."my child, i will ask you questions, since you don't seem familiar with these things. we will take, one by one, the commandments of god. listen to me and do not be disturbed. speak very frankly and never fear that you may say too much."'one god alone, thou shalt adore, and love him perfectly.'  have you ever loved anything, or anybody, as well as you loved god? have you loved him with all your soul, all your heart, all the strength of your love?"  sabot was perspiring with the effort of thinking. he replied:  "no. oh, no, m'sieu le cure. i love god as much as i can. that is-- yes--i love him very much. to say that i do not love my children, no--i cannot say that. to say that if i had to choose between them and god, i could not be sure. to say that if i had to lose a hundred francs for the love of god, i could not say about that. but i love him well, for sure, i love him all the same." the priest said gravely "you must love him more than all besides." and sabot, meaning well, declared "i will do what i possibly can, m'sieu le cure." the abbe resumed:  "'god's name in vain thou shalt not take nor swear by any other thing.'  did you ever swear?"  "no-oh, that, no! i never swear, never. sometimes, in a moment of anger, i may say sacre nom de dieu! but then, i never swear."  "that is swearing," cried the priest, and added seriously:  "do not do it again.  'thy sundays thou shalt keep in serving god devoutly.'have you ever loved anything, or anybody, as well as you loved god? have you loved him with all your soul, all your heart, all the strength of your love?"sabot was perspiring with the effort of thinking. he replied:"no. oh, no, m'sieu le cure. i love god as much as i can. that is-- yes--i love him very much. to say that i do not love my children, no--i cannot say that. to say that if i had to choose between them and god, i could not be sure. to say that if i had to lose a hundred francs for the love of god, i could not say about that. but i love him well, for sure, i love him all the same." the priest said gravely "you must love him more than all besides." and sabot, meaning well, declared "i will do what i possibly can, m'sieu le cure." the abbe resumed:"'god's name in vain thou shalt not take nor swear by any other thing.'did you ever swear?""no-oh, that, no! i never swear, never. sometimes, in a moment of anger, i may say sacre nom de dieu! but then, i never swear.""that is swearing," cried the priest, and added seriously:"do not do it again.'thy sundays thou shalt keepwhat do you do on sunday?"this time sabot scratched his ear."why, i serve god as best i can, m'sieu le cure. i serve him--at home. i work on sunday."the cure interrupted him, saying magnanimously:"i know, you will do better in future. i will pass over the following commandments, certain that you have not transgressed the two first. we will take from the sixth to the ninth. i will resume:"'others' goods thou shalt not take nor keep what is not thine.'have you ever taken in any way what belonged to another?"but theodule sabot became indignant."of course not, of course not! i am an honest man, m'sieu le cure, i swear it, for sure. to say that i have not sometimes charged for a few more hours of work to customers who had means, i could not say that. to say that i never add a few centimes to bills, only a few, i would not say that. but to steal, no! oh, not that, no!"the priest resumed severely:"to take one single centime constitutes a theft. do not do it again.'false witness thou shalt not bear, nor lie in any way.'have you ever told a lie?""no, as to that, no. i am not a liar. that is my quality. to say that i have never told a big story, i would not like to say that. to say that i have never made people believe things that were not true when it was to my own interest, i would not like to say that. but as for lying, i am not a liar."the priest simply said:"watch yourself more closely." then he continued:"'the works of the flesh thou shalt not desire except in marriage only.'did you ever desire, or live with, any other woman than your wife?"sabot exclaimed with sincerity:"as to that, no; oh, as to that, no, m'sieu le cure. my poor wife, deceive her! no, no! not so much as the tip of a finger, either in thought or in act. that is the truth."they were silent a few seconds, then, in a lower tone, as though a doubt had arisen in his mind, he resumed:"when i go to town, to say that i never go into a house, you know, one of the licensed houses, just to laugh and talk and see something different, i could not say that. but i always pay, monsieur le cure, i always pay. from the moment you pay, without anyone seeing or knowing you, no one can get you into trouble."the cure did not insist, and gave him absolutiontheodule sabot did the work on the chancel, and goes to communion every month.the boulevard, that river of humanity, was alive with people in the golden light of the setting sun. the whole sky was red, blinding, and behind the madeleine an immense bank of flaming clouds cast a shower of light the whole length of tile boulevard, vibrant as the heat from a brazier.the gay, animated crowd went by in this golden mist and seemed to be glorified. their faces were gilded, their black hats and clothes took on purple tints, the patent leather of their shoes cast bright reflections on the asphalt of the sidewalk.before the cafes a mass of men were drinking opalescent liquids that looked like precious stones dissolved in the glasses.in the midst of the drinkers two officers in full uniform dazzled all eyes with their glittering gold lace. they chatted, happy without asking why, in this glory of life, in this radiant light of sunset, and they looked at the crowd, the leisurely men and the hurrying women who left a bewildering odor of perfume as they passed by.all at once an enormous negro, dressed in black, with a paunch beneath his jean waistcoat, which was covered with charms, his face shining as if it had been polished, passed before them with a triumphant air. he laughed at the passers-by, at the news venders, at the dazzling sky, at the whole of paris. he was so tall that he overtopped everyone else, and when he passed all the loungers turned round to look at his back.but he suddenly perceived the officers and darted towards them, jostling the drinkers in his path. as soon as he reached their table he fixed his gleaming and delighted eyes upon them and the corners of his mouth expanded to his ears, showing his dazzling white teeth like a crescent moon in a black sky. the two men looked in astonishment at this ebony giant, unable to understand his delight.with a voice that made all the guests laugh, he said:"good-day, my lieutenant."one of the officers was commander of a battalion, the other was a colonel. the former said:"i do not know you, sir. i am at a loss to know what you want of me.""me like you much, lieutenant vedie, siege of bezi, much grapes, find me."the officer, utterly bewildered, looked at the man intently, trying to refresh his memory. then he cried abruptly:  "timbuctoo?"  the negro, radiant, slapped his thigh as he uttered a tremendous laugh and roared:  "yes, yes, my lieutenant; you remember timbuctoo, ya. how do you do?"  the commandant held out his hand, laughing heartily as he did so. then timbuctoo became serious. he seized the officer's hand and, before the other could prevent it, he kissed it, according to negro and arab custom. the officer embarrassed, said in a severe tone:  "come now, timbuctoo, we are not in africa. sit down there and tell me how it is i find you here."  timbuctoo swelled himself out and, his words falling over one another, replied hurriedly:  "make much money, much, big restaurant, good food; prussians, me, much steal, much, french cooking; timbuctoo cook to the emperor; two thousand francs mine. ha, ha, ha, ha!"  and he laughed, doubling himself up, roaring, with wild delight in his glances.  when the officer, who understood his strange manner of expressing himself, had questioned him he said:  "well, au revoir, timbuctoo. i will see you again."  the negro rose, this time shaking the hand that was extended to him and, smiling still, cried:  "good-day, good-day, my lieutenant!"  he went off so happy that he gesticulated as he walked, and people thought he was crazy.  "who is that brute?" asked the colonel.  "a fine fellow and a brave soldier. i will tell you what i know about him. it is funny enough.  "you know that at the commencement of the war of 1870 i was shut up in bezieres, that this negro calls bezi. we were not besieged, but blockaded. the prussian lines surrounded us on all sides, outside the reach of cannon, not firing on us, but slowly starving us out.  "i was then lieutenant. our garrison consisted of soldier of all descriptions, fragments of slaughtered regiments, some that had run away, freebooters separated from the main army, etc. we had all kinds, in fact even eleven turcos [algerian soldiers in the service of france], who arrived one evening no one knew whence or how. they appeared at the gates of the city, exhausted, in rags, starving and dirty. they were handed over to me.  "i saw very soon that they were absolutely undisciplined, always in the street and always drunk. i tried putting them in the police station, even in prison, but nothing was of any use. they would disappear, sometimes for days at a time, as if they had been swallowed up by the earth, and then come back staggering drunk. they had no money. where did they buy drink and how and with what?  "this began to worry me greatly, all the more as these savages interested me with their everlasting laugh and their characteristics of overgrown frolicsome children.  "i then noticed that they blindly obeyed the largest among them, the one you have just seen. he made them do as he pleased, planned their mysterious expeditions with the all-powerful and undisputed authority of a leader. i sent for him and questioned him. our conversation lasted fully three hours, for it was hard for me to understand his remarkable gibberish. as for him, poor devil, he made unheard-of efforts to make himself intelligible, invented words, gesticulated, perspired in his anxiety, mopping his forehead, puffing, stopping and abruptly beginning again when he thought he had found a new method of explaining what he wanted to say.  "i gathered finally that he was the son of a big chief, a sort of negro king of the region around timbuctoo. i asked him his name. he repeated something like 'chavaharibouhalikranafotapolara.' it seemed simpler to me to give him the name of his native place, 'timbuctoo.' and a week later he was known by no other name in the garrison.  "but we were all wildly anxious to find out where this african ex-prince procured his drinks. i discovered it in a singular manner.  "i was on the ramparts one morning, watching the horizon, when i perceived something moving about in a vineyard. it was near the time of vintage, the grapes were ripe, but i was not thinking of that. i thought that a spy was approaching the town, and i organized a complete expedition to catch the prowler. i took command myself, after obtaining permission from the general.  "i sent out by three different gates three little companies, which were to meet at the suspected vineyard and form a cordon round it. in order to cut off the spy's retreat, one of these detachments had to make at least an hour's march. a watch on the walls signalled to me that the person i had seen had not left the place. we went along in profound silence, creeping, almost crawling, along the ditches. at last we reached the spot assigned.  "i abruptly disbanded my soldiers, who darted into the vineyard and found timbuctoo on hands and knees travelling around among the vines and eating grapes, or rather devouring them as a dog eats his sop, snatching them in mouthfuls from the vine with his teeth.  "i wanted him to get up, but he could not think of it. i then understood why he was crawling on his hands and knees. as soon as we stood him on his feet he began to wabble, then stretched out his arms and fell down on his nose. he was more drunk than i have ever seen anyone.  "they brought him home on two poles. he never stopped laughing all the way back, gesticulating with his arms and legs.  "this explained the mystery. my men also drank the juice of the grapes, and when they were so intoxicated they could not stir they went to sleep in the vineyard. as for timbuctoo, his love of the vineyard was beyond all belief and all bounds. he lived in it as did the thrushes, whom he hated with the jealous hate of a rival. he repeated incessantly: 'the thrushes eat all the grapes, captain!'  "one evening i was sent for. something had been seen on the plain coming in our direction. i had not brought my field-glass and i could not distinguish things clearly. it looked like a great serpent uncoiling itself--a convoy. how could i tell?  "i sent some men to meet this strange caravan, which presently made its triumphal entry. timbuctoo and nine of his comrades were carrying on a sort of altar made of camp stools eight severed, grinning and bleeding heads. the african was dragging along a horse to whose tail another head was fastened, and six other animals followed, adorned in the same manner.  "this is what i learned: having started out to the vineyard, my africans had suddenly perceived a detachment of prussians approaching a village. instead of taking to their heels, they hid themselves, and as soon as the prussian officers dismounted at an inn to refresh themselves, the eleven rascals rushed on them, put to flight the lancers, who thought they were being attacked by the main army, killed the two sentries, then the colonel and the five officers of his escort.  "that day i kissed timbuctoo. i saw, however, that he walked with difficulty and thought he was wounded. he laughed and said:  "'me provisions for my country.  "timbuctoo was not fighting for glory, but for gain. everything he found that seemed to him to be of the slightest value, especially anything that glistened, he put in his pocket. what a pocket! an abyss that began at his hips and reached to his ankles. he had retained an old term used by the troopers and called it his 'profonde,' and it was his 'profonde' in fact.  "he had taken the gold lace off the prussian uniforms, the brass off their helmets, detached their buttons, etc., and had thrown them all into his 'profonde,' which was full to overflowing.  "each day he pocketed every glistening object that came beneath his observation, pieces of tin or pieces of silver, and sometimes his contour was very comical.  "he intended to carry all that back to the land of ostriches, whose brother he might have been, this son of a king, tormented with the longing to gobble up all objects that glistened. if he had not had his 'profonde' what would he have done? he doubtless would have swallowed them.  "each morning his pocket was empty. he had, then, some general store where his riches were piled up. but where? i could not discover it.  "the general, on being informed of timbuctoo's mighty act of valor, had the headless bodies that had been left in the neighboring village interred at once, that it might not be discovered that they were decapitated. the prussians returned thither the following day. the mayor and seven prominent inhabitants were shot on the spot, by way of reprisal, as having denounced the prussians.  "winter was here. we were exhausted and desperate. there were skirmishes now every day. the famished men could no longer march. the eight 'turcos' alone (three had been killed) remained fat and shiny, vigorous and always ready to fight. timbuctoo was even getting fatter. he said to me one day:  "'you much hungry; me good meat.'  "and he brought me an excellent filet. but of what? we had no more cattle, nor sheep, nor goats, nor donkeys, nor pigs. it was impossible to get a horse. i thought of all this after i had devoured my meat. then a horrible idea came to me. these negroes were born close to a country where they eat human beings! and each day such a number of soldiers were killed around the town! i questioned timbuctoo. he would not answer. i did not insist, but from that time on i declined his presents.  "he worshipped me. one night snow took us by surprise at the outposts. we were seated, on the ground. i looked with pity at those poor negroes shivering beneath this white frozen shower. i was very cold and began to cough. at once i felt something fall on me like a large warm quilt. it was timbuctoo's cape that he had thrown on my shoulders.  "i rose and returned his garment, saying:  "'keep it, my boy; you need it more than i do.'  "'non, my lieutenant, for you; me no need. me hot, hot!'  "and he looked at me entreatingly.  "'come, obey orders. keep your cape; i insist,' i replied.  "he then stood up, drew his sword, which he had sharpened to an edge like a scythe, and holding in his other hand the large cape which i had refused, said:  "'if you not keep cape, me cut. no one cape.'  "and he would have done it. so i yielded.  "eight days later we capitulated. some of us had been able to escape, the rest were to march out of the town and give themselves up to the conquerors.  "i went towards the exercising ground, where we were all to meet, when i was dumfounded at the sight of a gigantic negro dressed in white duck and wearing a straw hat. it was timbuctoo. he was beaming and was walking with his hands in his pockets in front of a little shop where two plates and two glasses were displayed.  "'what are you doing?' i said.  "'me not go. me good cook; me make food for colonel algeria. me eat prussians; much steal, much.'  "there were ten degrees of frost. i shivered at sight of this negro in white duck. he took me by the arm and made me go inside. i noticed an immense flag that he was going to place outside his door as soon as we had left, for he had some shame.  i read this sign, traced by the hand of some accomplice  "'army kitchen of m. timbuctoo, "'formerly cook to h. m. the emperor. "'a parisian artist.  moderate prices.'"timbuctoo?"  the negro, radiant, slapped his thigh as he uttered a tremendous laugh and roared:  "yes, yes, my lieutenant; you remember timbuctoo, ya. how do you do?"  the commandant held out his hand, laughing heartily as he did so. then timbuctoo became serious. he seized the officer's hand and, before the other could prevent it, he kissed it, according to negro and arab custom. the officer embarrassed, said in a severe tone:  "come now, timbuctoo, we are not in africa. sit down there and tell me how it is i find you here."  timbuctoo swelled himself out and, his words falling over one another, replied hurriedly:  "make much money, much, big restaurant, good food; prussians, me, much steal, much, french cooking; timbuctoo cook to the emperor; two thousand francs mine. ha, ha, ha, ha!"  and he laughed, doubling himself up, roaring, with wild delight in his glances.  when the officer, who understood his strange manner of expressing himself, had questioned him he said:  "well, au revoir, timbuctoo. i will see you again."  the negro rose, this time shaking the hand that was extended to him and, smiling still, cried:  "good-day, good-day, my lieutenant!"  he went off so happy that he gesticulated as he walked, and people thought he was crazy.  "who is that brute?" asked the colonel.  "a fine fellow and a brave soldier. i will tell you what i know about him. it is funny enough.  "you know that at the commencement of the war of 1870 i was shut up in bezieres, that this negro calls bezi. we were not besieged, but blockaded. the prussian lines surrounded us on all sides, outside the reach of cannon, not firing on us, but slowly starving us out.  "i was then lieutenant. our garrison consisted of soldier of all descriptions, fragments of slaughtered regiments, some that had run away, freebooters separated from the main army, etc. we had all kinds, in fact even eleven turcos [algerian soldiers in the service of france], who arrived one evening no one knew whence or how. they appeared at the gates of the city, exhausted, in rags, starving and dirty. they were handed over to me.  "i saw very soon that they were absolutely undisciplined, always in the street and always drunk. i tried putting them in the police station, even in prison, but nothing was of any use. they would disappear, sometimes for days at a time, as if they had been swallowed up by the earth, and then come back staggering drunk. they had no money. where did they buy drink and how and with what?  "this began to worry me greatly, all the more as these savages interested me with their everlasting laugh and their characteristics of overgrown frolicsome children.  "i then noticed that they blindly obeyed the largest among them, the one you have just seen. he made them do as he pleased, planned their mysterious expeditions with the all-powerful and undisputed authority of a leader. i sent for him and questioned him. our conversation lasted fully three hours, for it was hard for me to understand his remarkable gibberish. as for him, poor devil, he made unheard-of efforts to make himself intelligible, invented words, gesticulated, perspired in his anxiety, mopping his forehead, puffing, stopping and abruptly beginning again when he thought he had found a new method of explaining what he wanted to say.  "i gathered finally that he was the son of a big chief, a sort of negro king of the region around timbuctoo. i asked him his name. he repeated something like 'chavaharibouhalikranafotapolara.' it seemed simpler to me to give him the name of his native place, 'timbuctoo.' and a week later he was known by no other name in the garrison.  "but we were all wildly anxious to find out where this african ex-prince procured his drinks. i discovered it in a singular manner.  "i was on the ramparts one morning, watching the horizon, when i perceived something moving about in a vineyard. it was near the time of vintage, the grapes were ripe, but i was not thinking of that. i thought that a spy was approaching the town, and i organized a complete expedition to catch the prowler. i took command myself, after obtaining permission from the general.  "i sent out by three different gates three little companies, which were to meet at the suspected vineyard and form a cordon round it. in order to cut off the spy's retreat, one of these detachments had to make at least an hour's march. a watch on the walls signalled to me that the person i had seen had not left the place. we went along in profound silence, creeping, almost crawling, along the ditches. at last we reached the spot assigned.  "i abruptly disbanded my soldiers, who darted into the vineyard and found timbuctoo on hands and knees travelling around among the vines and eating grapes, or rather devouring them as a dog eats his sop, snatching them in mouthfuls from the vine with his teeth.  "i wanted him to get up, but he could not think of it. i then understood why he was crawling on his hands and knees. as soon as we stood him on his feet he began to wabble, then stretched out his arms and fell down on his nose. he was more drunk than i have ever seen anyone.  "they brought him home on two poles. he never stopped laughing all the way back, gesticulating with his arms and legs.  "this explained the mystery. my men also drank the juice of the grapes, and when they were so intoxicated they could not stir they went to sleep in the vineyard. as for timbuctoo, his love of the vineyard was beyond all belief and all bounds. he lived in it as did the thrushes, whom he hated with the jealous hate of a rival. he repeated incessantly: 'the thrushes eat all the grapes, captain!'  "one evening i was sent for. something had been seen on the plain coming in our direction. i had not brought my field-glass and i could not distinguish things clearly. it looked like a great serpent uncoiling itself--a convoy. how could i tell?  "i sent some men to meet this strange caravan, which presently made its triumphal entry. timbuctoo and nine of his comrades were carrying on a sort of altar made of camp stools eight severed, grinning and bleeding heads. the african was dragging along a horse to whose tail another head was fastened, and six other animals followed, adorned in the same manner.  "this is what i learned: having started out to the vineyard, my africans had suddenly perceived a detachment of prussians approaching a village. instead of taking to their heels, they hid themselves, and as soon as the prussian officers dismounted at an inn to refresh themselves, the eleven rascals rushed on them, put to flight the lancers, who thought they were being attacked by the main army, killed the two sentries, then the colonel and the five officers of his escort.  "that day i kissed timbuctoo. i saw, however, that he walked with difficulty and thought he was wounded. he laughed and said:  "'me provisions for my country.  "timbuctoo was not fighting for glory, but for gain. everything he found that seemed to him to be of the slightest value, especially anything that glistened, he put in his pocket. what a pocket! an abyss that began at his hips and reached to his ankles. he had retained an old term used by the troopers and called it his 'profonde,' and it was his 'profonde' in fact.  "he had taken the gold lace off the prussian uniforms, the brass off their helmets, detached their buttons, etc., and had thrown them all into his 'profonde,' which was full to overflowing.  "each day he pocketed every glistening object that came beneath his observation, pieces of tin or pieces of silver, and sometimes his contour was very comical.  "he intended to carry all that back to the land of ostriches, whose brother he might have been, this son of a king, tormented with the longing to gobble up all objects that glistened. if he had not had his 'profonde' what would he have done? he doubtless would have swallowed them.  "each morning his pocket was empty. he had, then, some general store where his riches were piled up. but where? i could not discover it.  "the general, on being informed of timbuctoo's mighty act of valor, had the headless bodies that had been left in the neighboring village interred at once, that it might not be discovered that they were decapitated. the prussians returned thither the following day. the mayor and seven prominent inhabitants were shot on the spot, by way of reprisal, as having denounced the prussians.  "winter was here. we were exhausted and desperate. there were skirmishes now every day. the famished men could no longer march. the eight 'turcos' alone (three had been killed) remained fat and shiny, vigorous and always ready to fight. timbuctoo was even getting fatter. he said to me one day:  "'you much hungry; me good meat.'  "and he brought me an excellent filet. but of what? we had no more cattle, nor sheep, nor goats, nor donkeys, nor pigs. it was impossible to get a horse. i thought of all this after i had devoured my meat. then a horrible idea came to me. these negroes were born close to a country where they eat human beings! and each day such a number of soldiers were killed around the town! i questioned timbuctoo. he would not answer. i did not insist, but from that time on i declined his presents.  "he worshipped me. one night snow took us by surprise at the outposts. we were seated, on the ground. i looked with pity at those poor negroes shivering beneath this white frozen shower. i was very cold and began to cough. at once i felt something fall on me like a large warm quilt. it was timbuctoo's cape that he had thrown on my shoulders.  "i rose and returned his garment, saying:  "'keep it, my boy; you need it more than i do.'  "'non, my lieutenant, for you; me no need. me hot, hot!'  "and he looked at me entreatingly.  "'come, obey orders. keep your cape; i insist,' i replied.  "he then stood up, drew his sword, which he had sharpened to an edge like a scythe, and holding in his other hand the large cape which i had refused, said:  "'if you not keep cape, me cut. no one cape.'  "and he would have done it. so i yielded.  "eight days later we capitulated. some of us had been able to escape, the rest were to march out of the town and give themselves up to the conquerors.  "i went towards the exercising ground, where we were all to meet, when i was dumfounded at the sight of a gigantic negro dressed in white duck and wearing a straw hat. it was timbuctoo. he was beaming and was walking with his hands in his pockets in front of a little shop where two plates and two glasses were displayed.  "'what are you doing?' i said.  "'me not go. me good cook; me make food for colonel algeria. me eat prussians; much steal, much.'  "there were ten degrees of frost. i shivered at sight of this negro in white duck. he took me by the arm and made me go inside. i noticed an immense flag that he was going to place outside his door as soon as we had left, for he had some shame.  i read this sign, traced by the hand of some accomplice  "'army kitchen of m. timbuctoo, "'formerly cook to h. m. the emperor."timbuctoo?"the negro, radiant, slapped his thigh as he uttered a tremendous laugh and roared:"yes, yes, my lieutenant; you remember timbuctoo, ya. how do you do?"the commandant held out his hand, laughing heartily as he did so. then timbuctoo became serious. he seized the officer's hand and, before the other could prevent it, he kissed it, according to negro and arab custom. the officer embarrassed, said in a severe tone:"come now, timbuctoo, we are not in africa. sit down there and tell me how it is i find you here."timbuctoo swelled himself out and, his words falling over one another, replied hurriedly:"make much money, much, big restaurant, good food; prussians, me, much steal, much, french cooking; timbuctoo cook to the emperor; two thousand francs mine. ha, ha, ha, ha!"and he laughed, doubling himself up, roaring, with wild delight in his glances.when the officer, who understood his strange manner of expressing himself, had questioned him he said:"well, au revoir, timbuctoo. i will see you again."the negro rose, this time shaking the hand that was extended to him and, smiling still, cried:"good-day, good-day, my lieutenant!"he went off so happy that he gesticulated as he walked, and people thought he was crazy."who is that brute?" asked the colonel."a fine fellow and a brave soldier. i will tell you what i know about him. it is funny enough."you know that at the commencement of the war of 1870 i was shut up in bezieres, that this negro calls bezi. we were not besieged, but blockaded. the prussian lines surrounded us on all sides, outside the reach of cannon, not firing on us, but slowly starving us out."i was then lieutenant. our garrison consisted of soldier of all descriptions, fragments of slaughtered regiments, some that had run away, freebooters separated from the main army, etc. we had all kinds, in fact even eleven turcos [algerian soldiers in the service of france], who arrived one evening no one knew whence or how. they appeared at the gates of the city, exhausted, in rags, starving and dirty. they were handed over to me."i saw very soon that they were absolutely undisciplined, always in the street and always drunk. i tried putting them in the police station, even in prison, but nothing was of any use. they would disappear, sometimes for days at a time, as if they had been swallowed up by the earth, and then come back staggering drunk. they had no money. where did they buy drink and how and with what?"this began to worry me greatly, all the more as these savages interested me with their everlasting laugh and their characteristics of overgrown frolicsome children."i then noticed that they blindly obeyed the largest among them, the one you have just seen. he made them do as he pleased, planned their mysterious expeditions with the all-powerful and undisputed authority of a leader. i sent for him and questioned him. our conversation lasted fully three hours, for it was hard for me to understand his remarkable gibberish. as for him, poor devil, he made unheard-of efforts to make himself intelligible, invented words, gesticulated, perspired in his anxiety, mopping his forehead, puffing, stopping and abruptly beginning again when he thought he had found a new method of explaining what he wanted to say."i gathered finally that he was the son of a big chief, a sort of negro king of the region around timbuctoo. i asked him his name. he repeated something like 'chavaharibouhalikranafotapolara.' it seemed simpler to me to give him the name of his native place, 'timbuctoo.' and a week later he was known by no other name in the garrison."but we were all wildly anxious to find out where this african ex-prince procured his drinks. i discovered it in a singular manner."i was on the ramparts one morning, watching the horizon, when i perceived something moving about in a vineyard. it was near the time of vintage, the grapes were ripe, but i was not thinking of that. i thought that a spy was approaching the town, and i organized a complete expedition to catch the prowler. i took command myself, after obtaining permission from the general."i sent out by three different gates three little companies, which were to meet at the suspected vineyard and form a cordon round it. in order to cut off the spy's retreat, one of these detachments had to make at least an hour's march. a watch on the walls signalled to me that the person i had seen had not left the place. we went along in profound silence, creeping, almost crawling, along the ditches. at last we reached the spot assigned."i abruptly disbanded my soldiers, who darted into the vineyard and found timbuctoo on hands and knees travelling around among the vines and eating grapes, or rather devouring them as a dog eats his sop, snatching them in mouthfuls from the vine with his teeth."i wanted him to get up, but he could not think of it. i then understood why he was crawling on his hands and knees. as soon as we stood him on his feet he began to wabble, then stretched out his arms and fell down on his nose. he was more drunk than i have ever seen anyone."they brought him home on two poles. he never stopped laughing all the way back, gesticulating with his arms and legs."this explained the mystery. my men also drank the juice of the grapes, and when they were so intoxicated they could not stir they went to sleep in the vineyard. as for timbuctoo, his love of the vineyard was beyond all belief and all bounds. he lived in it as did the thrushes, whom he hated with the jealous hate of a rival. he repeated incessantly: 'the thrushes eat all the grapes, captain!'"one evening i was sent for. something had been seen on the plain coming in our direction. i had not brought my field-glass and i could not distinguish things clearly. it looked like a great serpent uncoiling itself--a convoy. how could i tell?"i sent some men to meet this strange caravan, which presently made its triumphal entry. timbuctoo and nine of his comrades were carrying on a sort of altar made of camp stools eight severed, grinning and bleeding heads. the african was dragging along a horse to whose tail another head was fastened, and six other animals followed, adorned in the same manner."this is what i learned: having started out to the vineyard, my africans had suddenly perceived a detachment of prussians approaching a village. instead of taking to their heels, they hid themselves, and as soon as the prussian officers dismounted at an inn to refresh themselves, the eleven rascals rushed on them, put to flight the lancers, who thought they were being attacked by the main army, killed the two sentries, then the colonel and the five officers of his escort."that day i kissed timbuctoo. i saw, however, that he walked with difficulty and thought he was wounded. he laughed and said:"'me provisions for my country."timbuctoo was not fighting for glory, but for gain. everything he found that seemed to him to be of the slightest value, especially anything that glistened, he put in his pocket. what a pocket! an abyss that began at his hips and reached to his ankles. he had retained an old term used by the troopers and called it his 'profonde,' and it was his 'profonde' in fact."he had taken the gold lace off the prussian uniforms, the brass off their helmets, detached their buttons, etc., and had thrown them all into his 'profonde,' which was full to overflowing."each day he pocketed every glistening object that came beneath his observation, pieces of tin or pieces of silver, and sometimes his contour was very comical."he intended to carry all that back to the land of ostriches, whose brother he might have been, this son of a king, tormented with the longing to gobble up all objects that glistened. if he had not had his 'profonde' what would he have done? he doubtless would have swallowed them."each morning his pocket was empty. he had, then, some general store where his riches were piled up. but where? i could not discover it."the general, on being informed of timbuctoo's mighty act of valor, had the headless bodies that had been left in the neighboring village interred at once, that it might not be discovered that they were decapitated. the prussians returned thither the following day. the mayor and seven prominent inhabitants were shot on the spot, by way of reprisal, as having denounced the prussians."winter was here. we were exhausted and desperate. there were skirmishes now every day. the famished men could no longer march. the eight 'turcos' alone (three had been killed) remained fat and shiny, vigorous and always ready to fight. timbuctoo was even getting fatter. he said to me one day:"'you much hungry; me good meat.'"and he brought me an excellent filet. but of what? we had no more cattle, nor sheep, nor goats, nor donkeys, nor pigs. it was impossible to get a horse. i thought of all this after i had devoured my meat. then a horrible idea came to me. these negroes were born close to a country where they eat human beings! and each day such a number of soldiers were killed around the town! i questioned timbuctoo. he would not answer. i did not insist, but from that time on i declined his presents."he worshipped me. one night snow took us by surprise at the outposts. we were seated, on the ground. i looked with pity at those poor negroes shivering beneath this white frozen shower. i was very cold and began to cough. at once i felt something fall on me like a large warm quilt. it was timbuctoo's cape that he had thrown on my shoulders."i rose and returned his garment, saying:"'keep it, my boy; you need it more than i do.'"'non, my lieutenant, for you; me no need. me hot, hot!'"and he looked at me entreatingly."'come, obey orders. keep your cape; i insist,' i replied."he then stood up, drew his sword, which he had sharpened to an edge like a scythe, and holding in his other hand the large cape which i had refused, said:"'if you not keep cape, me cut. no one cape.'"and he would have done it. so i yielded."eight days later we capitulated. some of us had been able to escape, the rest were to march out of the town and give themselves up to the conquerors."i went towards the exercising ground, where we were all to meet, when i was dumfounded at the sight of a gigantic negro dressed in white duck and wearing a straw hat. it was timbuctoo. he was beaming and was walking with his hands in his pockets in front of a little shop where two plates and two glasses were displayed."'what are you doing?' i said."'me not go. me good cook; me make food for colonel algeria. me eat prussians; much steal, much.'"there were ten degrees of frost. i shivered at sight of this negro in white duck. he took me by the arm and made me go inside. i noticed an immense flag that he was going to place outside his door as soon as we had left, for he had some shame.i read this sign, traced by the hand of some accomplice"'army kitchen of m. timbuctoo,"in spite of the despair that was gnawing at my heart, i could not help laughing, and i left my negro to his new enterprise."was not that better than taking him prisoner?"you have just seen that he made a success of it, the rascal."bezieres to-day belongs to the germans. the 'restaurant timbuctoo' is the beginning of a retaliation."he was known for thirty miles round was father toine--fat toine, toine- my-extra, antoine macheble, nicknamed burnt-brandy--the innkeeper of tournevent.it was he who had made famous this hamlet buried in a niche in the valley that led down to the sea, a poor little peasants' hamlet consisting of ten norman cottages surrounded by ditches and trees.the houses were hidden behind a curve which had given the place the name of tournevent. it seemed to have sought shelter in this ravine overgrown with grass and rushes, from the keen, salt sea wind--the ocean wind that devours and burns like fire, that drys up and withers like the sharpest frost of winter, just as birds seek shelter in the furrows of the fields in time of storm.but the whole hamlet seemed to be the property of antoine macheble, nicknamed burnt-brandy, who was called also toine, or toine-my-extra-special, the latter in consequence of a phrase current in his mouth:"my extra-special is the best in france:"his "extra-special" was, of course, his cognac.for the last twenty years he had served the whole countryside with his extra-special and his "burnt-brandy," for whenever he was asked: "what shall i drink, toine?" he invariably answered: "a burnt-brandy, my son- in-law; that warms the inside and clears the head--there's nothing better for your body."he called everyone his son-in-law, though he had no daughter, either married or to be married.well known indeed was toine burnt-brandy, the stoutest man in all normandy. his little house seemed ridiculously small, far too small and too low to hold him; and when people saw him standing at his door, as he did all day long, they asked one another how he could possibly get through the door. but he went in whenever a customer appeared, for it was only right that toine should be invited to take his thimbleful of whatever was drunk in his wine shop.his inn bore the sign: "the friends' meeting-place"--and old toine was, indeed, the friend of all. his customers came from fecamp and montvilliers, just for the fun of seeing him and hearing him talk; for fat toine would have made a tombstone laugh. he had a way of chaffing people without offending them, or of winking to express what he didn't say, of slapping his thighs when he was merry in such a way as to make you hold your sides, laughing. and then, merely to see him drink was a curiosity. he drank everything that was offered him, his roguish eyes twinkling, both with the enjoyment of drinking and at the thought of the money he was taking in. his was a double pleasure: first, that of drinking; and second, that of piling up the cash.you should have heard him quarrelling with his wife! it was worth paying for to see them together. they had wrangled all the thirty years they had been married; but toine was good-humored, while his better-half grew angry. she was a tall peasant woman, who walked with long steps like a stork, and had a head resembling that of an angry screech-owl. she spent her time rearing chickens in a little poultry-yard behind the inn, and she was noted for her success in fattening them for the table.whenever the gentry of fecamp gave a dinner they always had at least one of madame toine's chickens to be in the fashion.but she was born ill-tempered, and she went through life in a mood of perpetual discontent. annoyed at everyone, she seemed to be particularly annoyed at her husband. she disliked his gaiety, his reputation, his rude health, his embonpoint. she treated him as a good-for-nothing creature because he earned his money without working, and as a glutton because he ate and drank as much as ten ordinary men; and not a day went by without her declaring spitefully:"you'd be better in the stye along with the pigs! you're so fat it makes me sick to look at you!"and she would shout in his face:"wait! wait a bit! we'll see! you'll burst one of these fine days like a sack of corn-you old bloat, you!"toine would laugh heartily, patting his corpulent person, and replying:"well, well, old hen, why don't you fatten up your chickens like that? just try!"and, rolling his sleeves back from his enormous arm, he said:"that would make a fine wing now, wouldn't it?"and the customers, doubled up with laughter, would thump the table with their fists and stamp their feet on the floor.the old woman, mad with rage, would repeat:"wait a bit! wait a bit! you'll see what'll happen. he'll burst like a sack of grain!"and off she would go, amid the jeers and laughter of the drinkers.toine was, in fact, an astonishing sight, he was so fat, so heavy, so red. he was one of those enormous beings with whom death seems to be amusing himself--playing perfidious tricks and pranks, investing with an irresistibly comic air his slow work of destruction. instead of manifesting his approach, as with others, in white hairs, in emaciation, in wrinkles, in the gradual collapse which makes the onlookers say: "gad! how he has changed!" he took a malicious pleasure in fattening toine, in making him monstrous and absurd, in tingeing his face with a deep crimson, in giving him the appearance of superhuman health, and the changes he inflicts on all were in the case of toine laughable, comic, amusing, instead of being painful and distressing to witness."wait a bit! wait a bit!" said his wife. "you'll see."at last toine had an apoplectic fit, and was paralyzed in consequence. the giant was put to bed in the little room behind the partition of the drinking-room that he might hear what was said and talk to his friends, for his head was quite clear although his enormous body was helplessly inert. it was hoped at first that his immense legs would regain some degree of power; but this hope soon disappeared, and toine spent his days and nights in the bed, which was only made up once a week, with the help of four neighbors who lifted the innkeeper, each holding a limb, while his mattress was turned.he kept his spirits, nevertheless; but his gaiety was of a different kind--more timid, more humble; and he lived in a constant, childlike fear of his wife, who grumbled from morning till night:"look at him there--the great glutton! the good-for-nothing creature, the old boozer! serve him right, serve him right!"he no longer answered her. he contented himself with winking behind the old woman's back, and turning over on his other side--the only movement of which he was now capable. he called this exercise a "tack to the north" or a "tack to the south."his great distraction nowadays was to listen to the conversations in the bar, and to shout through the wall when he recognized a friend's voice:"hallo, my son-in-law! is that you, celestin?"and celestin maloisel answered:"yes, it's me, toine. are you getting about again yet, old fellow?""not exactly getting about," answered toine. "but i haven't grown thin; my carcass is still good."soon he got into the way of asking his intimates into his room to keep him company, although it grieved him to see that they had to drink without him. it pained him to the quick that his customers should be drinking without him."that's what hurts worst of all," he would say: "that i cannot drink my extra-special any more. i can put up with everything else, but going without drink is the very deuce."then his wife's screech-owl face would appear at the window, and she would break in with the words:"look at him! look at him now, the good-for-nothing wretch! i've got to feed him and wash him just as if he were a pig!"and when the old woman had gone, a cock with red feathers would sometimes fly up to the window sill and looking into the room with his round inquisitive eye, would begin to crow loudly. occasionally, too, a few hens would flutter as far as the foot of the bed, seeking crumbs on the floor. toine's friends soon deserted the drinking room to come and chat every afternoon beside the invalid's bed. helpless though he was, the jovial toine still provided them with amusement. he would have made the devil himself laugh. three men were regular in their attendance at the bedside: celestin maloisel, a tall, thin fellow, somewhat gnarled, like the trunk of an apple-tree; prosper horslaville, a withered little man with a ferret nose, cunning as a fox; and cesaire paumelle, who never spoke, but who enjoyed toine's society all the same.they brought a plank from the yard, propped it upon the edge of the bed, and played dominoes from two till six.but toine's wife soon became insufferable. she could not endure that her fat, lazy husband should amuse himself at games while lying in his bed; and whenever she caught him beginning a game she pounced furiously on the dominoes, overturned the plank, and carried all away into the bar, declaring that it was quite enough to have to feed that fat, lazy pig without seeing him amusing himself, as if to annoy poor people who had to work hard all day long.celestin maloisel and cesaire paumelle bent their heads to the storm, but prosper horslaville egged on the old woman, and was only amused at her wrath.one day, when she was more angry than usual, he said:"do you know what i'd do if i were you?"she fixed her owl's eyes on him, and waited for his next words.prosper went on:"your man is as hot as an oven, and he never leaves his bed--well, i'd make him hatch some eggs."she was struck dumb at the suggestion, thinking that prosper could not possibly be in earnest. but he continued:"i'd put five under one arm, and five under the other, the same day that i set a hen. they'd all come out at the same time; then i'd take your husband's chickens to the hen to bring up with her own. you'd rear a fine lot that way.""could it be done?" asked the astonished old woman."could it be done?" echoed the man. "why not? since eggs can be hatched in a warm box why shouldn't they be hatched in a warm bed?"she was struck by this reasoning, and went away soothed and reflective.a week later she entered toine's room with her apron full of eggs, and said:"i've just put the yellow hen on ten eggs. here are ten for you; try not to break them.""what do you want?" asked the amazed toine."i want you to hatch them, you lazy creature!" she answered.he laughed at first; then, finding she was serious, he got angry, and refused absolutely to have the eggs put under his great arms, that the warmth of his body might hatch them.but the old woman declared wrathfully:"you'll get no dinner as long as you won't have them. you'll see what'll happen."tome was uneasy, but answered nothing.when twelve o'clock struck, he called out:"hullo, mother, is the soup ready?""there's no soup for you, lazy-bones," cried the old woman from her kitchen.he thought she must be joking, and waited a while. then he begged, implored, swore, "tacked to the north" and "tacked to the south," and beat on the wall with his fists, but had to consent at last to five eggs being placed against his left side; after which he had his soup.when his friends arrived that afternoon they thought he must be ill, he seemed so constrained and queer.they started the daily game of dominoes. but tome appeared to take no pleasure in it, and reached forth his hand very slowly, and with great precaution."what's wrong with your arm?" asked horslaville."i have a sort of stiffness in the shoulder," answered toine.suddenly they heard people come into the inn. the players were silent.it was the mayor with the deputy. they ordered two glasses of extra- special, and began to discuss local affairs. as they were talking in somewhat low tones toine wanted to put his ear to the wall, and, forgetting all about his eggs, he made a sudden "tack to the north," which had the effect of plunging him into the midst of an omelette.at the loud oath he swore his wife came hurrying into the room, and, guessing what had happened, stripped the bedclothes from him with lightning rapidity. she stood at first without moving or uttering a syllable, speechless with indignation at sight of the yellow poultice sticking to her husband's side.then, trembling with fury, she threw herself on the paralytic, showering on him blows such as those with which she cleaned her linen on the seashore. tome's three friends were choking with laughter, coughing, spluttering and shouting, and the fat innkeeper himself warded his wife's attacks with all the prudence of which he was capable, that he might not also break the five eggs at his other side.tome was conquered. he had to hatch eggs, he had to give up his games of dominoes and renounce movement of any sort, for the old woman angrily deprived him of food whenever he broke an egg.he lay on his back, with eyes fixed on the ceiling, motionless, his arms raised like wings, warming against his body the rudimentary chickens enclosed in their white shells.he spoke now only in hushed tones; as if he feared a noise as much as motion, and he took a feverish interest in the yellow hen who was accomplishing in the poultry-yard the same task as he."has the yellow hen eaten her food all right?" he would ask his wife.and the old woman went from her fowls to her husband and from her husband to her fowls, devoured by anxiety as to the welfare of the little chickens who were maturing in the bed and in the nest.the country people who knew the story came, agog with curiosity, to ask news of toine. they entered his room on tiptoe, as one enters a sick- chamber, and asked:"well! how goes it?""all right," said toine; "only it keeps me fearfully hot."one morning his wife entered in a state of great excitement, and declared:"the yellow hen has seven chickens! three of the eggs were addled."toine's heart beat painfully. how many would he have?"will it soon be over?" he asked, with the anguish of a woman who is about to become a mother."it's to be hoped so!" answered the old woman crossly, haunted by fear of failure.they waited. friends of toine who had got wind that his time was drawing near arrived, and filled the little room.nothing else was talked about in the neighboring cottages. inquirers asked one another for news as they stood at their doors.about three o'clock toine fell asleep. he slumbered half his time nowadays. he was suddenly awakened by an unaccustomed tickling under his right arm. he put his left hand on the spot, and seized a little creature covered with yellow down, which fluttered in his hand.his emotion was so great that he cried out, and let go his hold of the chicken, which ran over his chest. the bar was full of people at the time. the customers rushed to toine's room, and made a circle round him as they would round a travelling showman; while madame toine picked up the chicken, which had taken refuge under her husband's beard.no one spoke, so great was the tension. it was a warm april day. outside the window the yellow hen could be heard calling to her newly- fledged brood.toine, who was perspiring with emotion and anxiety, murmured:"i have another now--under the left arm."his' wife plunged her great bony hand into the bed, and pulled out a second chicken with all the care of a midwife.the neighbors wanted to see it. it was passed from one to another, and examined as if it were a phenomenon.for twenty minutes no more hatched out, then four emerged at the same moment from their shells.there was a great commotion among the lookers-on. and toine smiled with satisfaction, beginning to take pride in this unusual sort of paternity. there were not many like him! truly, he was a remarkable specimen of humanity!"that makes six!" he declared. "great heavens, what a christening we'll have!"and a loud laugh rose from all present. newcomers filled the bar. they asked one another:"how many are there?""six."toine's wife took this new family to the hen, who clucked loudly, bristled her feathers, and spread her wings wide to shelter her growing brood of little ones."there's one more!" cried toine.he was mistaken. there were three! it was an unalloyed triumph! the last chicken broke through its shell at seven o'clock in the evening. all the eggs were good! and toine, beside himself with joy, his brood hatched out, exultant, kissed the tiny creature on the back, almost suffocating it. he wanted to keep it in his bed until morning, moved by a mother's tenderness toward the tiny being which he had brought to life, but the old woman carried it away like the others, turning a deaf ear to her husband's entreaties.the delighted spectators went off to spread the news of the event, and horslaville, who was the last to go, asked:"you'll invite me when the first is cooked, won't you, toine?"at this idea a smile overspread the fat man's face, and he answered:"certainly i'll invite you, my son-in-law."every sunday, as soon as they were free, the little soldiers would go for a walk. they turned to the right on leaving the barracks, crossed courbevoie with rapid strides, as though on a forced march; then, as the houses grew scarcer, they slowed down and followed the dusty road which leads to bezons.they were small and thin, lost in their ill-fitting capes, too large and too long, whose sleeves covered their hands; their ample red trousers fell in folds around their ankles. under the high, stiff shako one could just barely perceive two thin, hollow-cheeked breton faces, with their calm, naã¯ve blue eyes. they never spoke during their journey, going straight before them, the same idea in each one's mind taking the place of conversation. for at the entrance of the little forest of champioux they had found a spot which reminded them of home, and they did not feel happy anywhere else.at the crossing of the colombes and chatou roads, when they arrived under the trees, they would take off their heavy, oppressive headgear and wipe their foreheads.they always stopped for a while on the bridge at bezons, and looked at the seine. they stood there several minutes, bending over the railing, watching the white sails, which perhaps reminded them of their home, and of the fishing smacks leaving for the open.as soon as they had crossed the seine, they would purchase provisions at the delicatessen, the baker's, and the wine merchant's. a piece of bologna, four cents' worth of bread, and a quart of wine, made up the luncheon which they carried away, wrapped up in their handkerchiefs. but as soon as they were out of the village their gait would slacken and they would begin to talk.before them was a plain with a few clumps of trees, which led to the woods, a little forest which seemed to remind them of that other forest at kermarivan. the wheat and oat fields bordered on the narrow path, and jean kerderen said each time to luc le ganidec:"it's just like home, just like plounivon.""yes, it's just like home."and they went on, side by side, their minds full of dim memories of home. they saw the fields, the hedges, the forests, and beaches.each time they stopped near a large stone on the edge of the private estate, because it reminded them of the dolmen of locneuven.as soon as they reached the first clump of trees, luc le ganidec would cut off a small stick, and, whittling it slowly, would walk on, thinking of the folks at home.jean kerderen carried the provisions.from time to time luc would mention a name, or allude to some boyish prank which would give them food for plenty of thought. and the home country, so dear and so distant, would little by little gain possession of their minds, sending them back through space, to the well-known forms and noises, to the familiar scenery, with the fragrance of its green fields and sea air. they no longer noticed the smells of the city. and in their dreams they saw their friends leaving, perhaps forever, for the dangerous fishing grounds.they were walking slowly, luc le ganidec and jean kerderen, contented and sad, haunted by a sweet sorrow, the slow and penetrating sorrow of a captive animal which remembers the days of its freedom.and when luc had finished whittling his stick, they came to a little nook, where every sunday they took their meal. they found the two bricks, which they had hidden in a hedge, and they made a little fire of dry branches and roasted their sausages on the ends of their knives.when their last crumb of bread had been eaten and the last drop of wine had been drunk, they stretched themselves out on the grass side by side, without speaking, their half-closed eyes looking away in the distance, their hands clasped as in prayer, their red-trousered legs mingling with the bright colors of the wild flowers.towards noon they glanced, from time to time, towards the village of bezons, for the dairy maid would soon be coming. every sunday she would pass in front of them on the way to milk her cow, the only cow in the neighborhood which was sent out to pasture.soon they would see the girl, coming through the fields, and it pleased them to watch the sparkling sunbeams reflected from her shining pail. they never spoke of her. they were just glad to see her, without understanding why.she was a tall, strapping girl, freckled and tanned by the open air--a girl typical of the parisian suburbs.once, on noticing that they were always sitting in the same place, she said to them:"do you always come here?"luc le ganidec, more daring than his friend, stammered:"yes, we come here for our rest."that was all. but the following sunday, on seeing them, she smiled with the kindly smile of a woman who understood their shyness, and she asked:"what are you doing here? are you watching the grass grow?"luc, cheered up, smiled: "p'raps."she continued: "it's not growing fast, is it?"he answered, still laughing: "not exactly."she went on. but when she came back with her pail full of milk, she stopped before them and said:"want some? it will remind you of home."she had, perhaps instinctively, guessed and touched the right spot.both were moved. then not without difficulty, she poured some milk into the bottle in which they had brought their wine. luc started to drink, carefully watching lest he should take more than his share. then he passed the bottle to jean. she stood before them, her hands on her hips, her pail at her feet, enjoying the pleasure that she was giving them. then she went on, saying: "well, bye-bye until next sunday!"for a long time they watched her tall form as it receded in the distance, blending with the background, and finally disappeared.the following week as they left the barracks, jean said to luc:"don't you think we ought to buy her something good?"they were sorely perplexed by the problem of choosing something to bring to the dairy maid. luc was in favor of bringing her some chitterlings; but jean, who had a sweet tooth, thought that candy would be the best thing. he won, and so they went to a grocery to buy two sous' worth, of red and white candies.this time they ate more quickly than usual, excited by anticipation.jean was the first one to notice her. "there she is," he said; and luc answered: "yes, there she is."she smiled when she saw them, and cried:"well, how are you to-day?"they both answered together:"all right! how's everything with you?"then she started to talk of simple things which might interest them; of the weather, of the crops, of her masters.they didn't dare to offer their candies, which were slowly melting in jean's pocket. finally luc, growing bolder, murmured:"we have brought you something."she asked: "let's see it."then jean, blushing to the tips of his ears, reached in his pocket, and drawing out the little paper bag, handed it to her.she began to eat the little sweet dainties. the two soldiers sat in front of her, moved and delighted.at last she went to do her milking, and when she came back she again gave them some milk.they thought of her all through the week and often spoke of her: the following sunday she sat beside them for a longer time.the three of them sat there, side by side, their eyes looking far away in the distance, their hands clasped over their knees, and they told each other little incidents and little details of the villages where they were born, while the cow, waiting to be milked, stretched her heavy head toward the girl and mooed.soon the girl consented to eat with them and to take a sip of wine. often she brought them plums pocket for plums were now ripe. her presence enlivened the little breton soldiers, who chattered away like two birds.one tuesday something unusual happened to luc le ganidec; he asked for leave and did not return until ten o'clock at night.jean, worried and racked his brain to account for his friend's having obtained leave.the following friday, luc borrowed ten sons from one of his friends, and once more asked and obtained leave for several hours.when he started out with jean on sunday he seemed queer, disturbed, changed. kerderen did not understand; he vaguely suspected something, but he could not guess what it might be.they went straight to the usual place, and lunched slowly. neither was hungry.soon the girl appeared. they watched her approach as they always did. when she was near, luc arose and went towards her. she placed her pail on the ground and kissed him. she kissed him passionately, throwing her arms around his neck, without paying attention to jean, without even noticing that he was there.poor jean was dazed, so dazed that he could not understand. his mind was upset and his heart broken, without his even realizing why.then the girl sat down beside luc, and they started to chat.jean was not looking at them. he understood now why his friend had gone out twice during the week. he felt the pain and the sting which treachery and deceit leave in their wake.luc and the girl went together to attend to the cow.jean followed them with his eyes. he saw them disappear side by side, the red trousers of his friend making a scarlet spot against the white road. it was luc who sank the stake to which the cow was tethered. the girl stooped down to milk the cow, while he absent-mindedly stroked the animal's glossy neck. then they left the pail in the grass and disappeared in the woods.jean could no longer see anything but the wall of leaves through which they had passed. he was unmanned so that he did not have strength to stand. he stayed there, motionless, bewildered and grieving-simple, passionate grief. he wanted to weep, to run away, to hide somewhere, never to see anyone again.then he saw them coming back again. they were walking slowly, hand in hand, as village lovers do. luc was carrying the pail.after kissing him again, the girl went on, nodding carelessly to jean. she did not offer him any milk that day.the two little soldiers sat side by side, motionless as always, silent and quiet, their calm faces in no way betraying the trouble in their hearts. the sun shone down on them. from time to time they could hear the plaintive lowing of the cow. at the usual time they arose to return.luc was whittling a stick. jean carried the empty bottle. he left it at the wine merchant's in bezons. then they stopped on the bridge, as they did every sunday, and watched the water flowing by.jean leaned over the railing, farther and farther, as though he had seen something in the stream which hypnotized him. luc said to him:"what's the matter? do you want a drink?"he had hardly said the last word when jean's head carried away the rest of his body, and the little blue and red soldier fell like a shot and disappeared in the water.luc, paralyzed with horror, tried vainly to shout for help. in the distance he saw something move; then his friend's head bobbed up out of the water only to disappear again.farther down he again noticed a hand, just one hand, which appeared and again went out of sight. that was all.the boatmen who had rushed to the scene found the body that day.luc ran back to the barracks, crazed, and with eyes and voice full of tears, he related the accident: "he leaned--he--he was leaning--so far over--that his head carried him away--and--he--fell--he fell----"emotion choked him so that he could say no more. if he had only known.we were speaking of adventures, and each one of us was relating his story of delightful experiences, surprising meetings, on the train, in a hotel, at the seashore. according to roger des annettes, the seashore was particularly favorable to the little blind god.gontran, who was keeping mum, was asked what he thought of it."i guess paris is about the best place for that," he said. "woman is like a precious trinket, we appreciate her all the more when we meet her in the most unexpected places; but the rarest ones are only to be found in paris."he was silent for a moment, and then continued:"by jove, it's great! walk along the streets on some spring morning. the little women, daintily tripping along, seem to blossom out like flowers. what a delightful, charming sight! the dainty perfume of violet is everywhere. the city is gay, and everybody notices the women. by jove, how tempting they are in their light, thin dresses, which occasionally give one a glimpse of the delicate pink flesh beneath!"one saunters along, head up, mind alert, and eyes open. i tell you it's great! you see her in the distance, while still a block away; you already know that she is going to please you at closer quarters. you can recognize her by the flower on her hat, the toss of her head, or her gait. she approaches, and you say to yourself: 'look out, here she is!' you come closer to her and you devour her with your eyes."is it a young girl running errands for some store, a young woman returning from church, or hastening to see her lover? what do you care? her well-rounded bosom shows through the thin waist. oh, if you could only take her in your arms and fondle and kiss her! her glance may be timid or bold, her hair light or dark. what difference does it make? she brushes against you, and a cold shiver runs down your spine. ah, how you wish for her all day! how many of these dear creatures have i met this way, and how wildly in love i would have been had i known them more intimately."have you ever noticed that the ones we would love the most distractedly are those whom we never meet to know? curious, isn't it? from time to time we barely catch a glimpse of some woman, the mere sight of whom thrills our senses. but it goes no further. when i think of all the adorable creatures that i have elbowed in the streets of paris, i fairly rave. who are they! where are they? where can i find them again? there is a proverb which says that happiness often passes our way; i am sure that i have often passed alongside the one who could have caught me like a linnet in the snare of her fresh beauty."roger des annettes had listened smilingly. he answered: "i know that as well as you do. this is what happened to me: about five years ago, for the first time i met, on the pont de la concorde, a young woman who made a wonderful impression on me. she was dark, rather stout, with glossy hair, and eyebrows which nearly met above two dark eyes. on her lip was a scarcely perceptible down, which made one dream-dream as one dreams of beloved woods, on seeing a bunch of wild violets. she had a small waist and a well-developed bust, which seemed to present a challenge, offer a temptation. her eyes were like two black spots on white enamel. her glance was strange, vacant, unthinking, and yet wonderfully beautiful. "i imagined that she might be a jewess. i followed her, and then turned round to look at her, as did many others. she walked with a swinging gait that was not graceful, but somehow attracted one. at the place de la concorde she took a carriage, and i stood there like a fool, moved by the strongest desire that had ever assailed me."for about three weeks i thought only of her; and then her memory passed out of my mind."six months later i descried her in the rue de la paix again. on seeing her i felt the same shock that one experiences on seeing a once dearly loved woman. i stopped that i might better observe her. when she passed close enough to touch me i felt as though i were standing before a red hot furnace. then, when she had passed by, i noticed a delicious sensation, as of a cooling breeze blowing over my face. i did not follow her. i was afraid of doing something foolish. i was afraid of myself."she haunted all my dreams."it was a year before i saw her again. but just as the sun was going down on one beautiful evening in may i recognized her walking along the avenue des champs-elysees. the arc de triomphe stood out in bold relief against the fiery glow of the sky. a golden haze filled the air; it was one of those delightful spring evenings which are the glory of paris. "i followed her, tormented by a desire to address her, to kneel before her, to pour forth the emotion which was choking me. twice i passed by her only to fall back, and each time as i passed by i felt this sensation, as of scorching heat, which i had noticed in the rue de la paix."she glanced at me, and then i saw her enter a house on the rue de presbourg. i waited for her two hours and she did not come out. then i decided to question the janitor. he seemed not to understand me. 'she must be visiting some one,' he said."the next time i was eight months without seeing her. but one freezing morning in january, i was walking along the boulevard malesherbes at a dog trot, so as to keep warm, when at the corner i bumped into a woman and knocked a small package out of her hand. i tried to apologize. it was she!"at first i stood stock still from the shock; then having returned to her the package which she had dropped, i said abruptly:"'i am both grieved and delighted, madame, to have jostled you. for more than two years i have known you, admired you, and had the most ardent wish to be presented to you; nevertheless i have been unable to find out who you are, or where you live. please excuse these foolish words. attribute them to a passionate desire to be numbered among your acquaintances. such sentiments can surely offend you in no way! you do not know me. my name is baron roger des annettes. make inquiries about me, and you will find that i am a gentleman. now, if you refuse my request, you will throw me into abject misery. please be good to me and tell me how i can see you.'"she looked at me with her strange vacant stare, and answered smilingly:"'give me your address. i will come and see you.'"i was so dumfounded that i must have shown my surprise. but i quickly gathered my wits together and gave her a visiting card, which she slipped into her pocket with a quick, deft movement."becoming bolder, i stammered:"'when shall i see you again?'"she hesitated, as though mentally running over her list of engagements, and then murmured:"'will sunday morning suit you?'"'i should say it would!'"she went on, after having stared at me, judged, weighed and analyzed me with this heavy and vacant gaze which seemed to leave a quieting and deadening impression on the person towards whom it was directed."until sunday my mind was occupied day and night trying to guess who she might be and planning my course of conduct towards her. i finally decided to buy her a jewel, a beautiful little jewel, which i placed in its box on the mantelpiece, and left it there awaiting her arrival."i spent a restless night waiting for her."at ten o'clock she came, calm and quiet, and with her hand outstretched, as though she had known me for years. drawing up a chair, i took her hat and coat and furs, and laid them aside. and then, timidly, i took her hand in mine; after that all went on without a hitch."ah, my friends! what a bliss it is, to stand at a discreet distance and watch the hidden pink and blue ribbons, partly concealed, to observe the hazy lines of the beloved one's form, as they become visible through the last of the filmy garments! what a delight it is to watch the ostrich- like modesty of those who are in reality none too modest. and what is so pretty as their motions!"her back was turned towards me, and suddenly, my eyes were irresistibly drawn to a large black spot right between her shoulders. what could it be? were my eyes deceiving me? but no, there it was, staring me in the face! then my mind reverted to the faint down on her lip, the heavy eyebrows almost meeting over her coal-black eyes, her glossy black hair-- i should have been prepared for some surprise."nevertheless i was dumfounded, and my mind was haunted by dim visions of strange adventures. i seemed to see before me one of the evil genii of the thousand and one nights, one of these dangerous and crafty creatures whose mission it is to drag men down to unknown depths. i thought of solomon, who made the queen of sheba walk on a mirror that he might be sure that her feet were not cloven."and when the time came for me to sing of love to her, my voice forsook me. at first she showed surprise, which soon turned to anger; and she said, quickly putting on her wraps:"'it was hardly worth while for me to go out of my way to come here.'"i wanted her to accept the ring which i had bought for her, but she replied haughtily: 'for whom do you take me, sir?' i blushed to the roots of my hair. she left without saying another word."there is my whole adventure. but the worst part of it is that i am now madly in love with her. i can't see a woman without thinking of her. all the others disgust me, unless they remind me of her. i cannot kiss a woman without seeing her face before me, and without suffering the torture of unsatisfied desire. she is always with me, always there, dressed or nude, my true love. she is there, beside the other one, visible but intangible. i am almost willing to believe that she was bewitched, and carried a talisman between her shoulders."who is she? i don't know yet. i have met her once or twice since. i bowed, but she pretended not to recognize me. who is she? an oriental? yes, doubtless an oriental jewess! i believe that she must be a jewess! but why? why? i don't know!"iabout half-past five one afternoon at the end of june when the sun was shining warm and bright into the large courtyard, a very elegant victoria with two beautiful black horses drew up in front of the mansion.the comtesse de mascaret came down the steps just as her husband, who was coming home, appeared in the carriage entrance. he stopped for a few moments to look at his wife and turned rather pale. the countess was very beautiful, graceful and distinguished looking, with her long oval face, her complexion like yellow ivory, her large gray eyes and her black hair; and she got into her carriage without looking at him, without even seeming to have noticed him, with such a particularly high-bred air, that the furious jealousy by which he had been devoured for so long again gnawed at his heart. he went up to her and said: "you are going for a drive?"she merely replied disdainfully: "you see i am!""in the bois de boulogne?""most probably.""may i come with you?""the carriage belongs to you."without being surprised at the tone in which she answered him, he got in and sat down by his wife's side and said: "bois de boulogne." the footman jumped up beside the coachman, and the horses as usual pranced and tossed their heads until they were in the street. husband and wife sat side by side without speaking. he was thinking how to begin a conversation, but she maintained such an obstinately hard look that he did not venture to make the attempt. at last, however, he cunningly, accidentally as it were, touched the countess' gloved hand with his own, but she drew her arm away with a movement which was so expressive of disgust that he remained thoughtful, in spite of his usual authoritative and despotic character, and he said: "gabrielle!""what do you want?""i think you are looking adorable."she did not reply, but remained lying back in the carriage, looking like an irritated queen. by that time they were driving up the champs elysees, toward the arc de triomphe. that immense monument, at the end of the long avenue, raised its colossal arch against the red sky and the sun seemed to be descending on it, showering fiery dust on it from the sky.the stream of carriages, with dashes of sunlight reflected in the silver trappings of the harness and the glass of the lamps, flowed on in a double current toward the town and toward the bois, and the comte de mascaret continued: "my dear gabrielle!"unable to control herself any longer, she replied in an exasperated voice: "oh! do leave me in peace, pray! i am not even allowed to have my carriage to myself now." he pretended not to hear her and continued: "you never have looked so pretty as you do to-day."her patience had come to an end, and she replied with irrepressible anger: "you are wrong to notice it, for i swear to you that i will never have anything to do with you in that way again."the count was decidedly stupefied and upset, and, his violent nature gaining the upper hand, he exclaimed: "what do you mean by that?" in a tone that betrayed rather the brutal master than the lover. she replied in a low voice, so that the servants might not hear amid the deafening noise of the wheels: "ah! what do i mean by that? what do i mean by that? now i recognize you again! do you want me to tell everything?""yes.""everything that has weighed on my heart since i have been the victim of your terrible selfishness?"he had grown red with surprise and anger and he growled between his closed teeth: "yes, tell me everything."he was a tall, broad-shouldered man, with a big red beard, a handsome man, a nobleman, a man of the world, who passed as a perfect husband and an excellent father, and now, for the first time since they had started, she turned toward him and looked him full in the face: "ah! you will hear some disagreeable things, but you must know that i am prepared for everything, that i fear nothing, and you less than any one to-day."he also was looking into her eyes and was already shaking with rage as he said in a low voice: "you are mad.""no, but i will no longer be the victim of the hateful penalty of maternity, which you have inflicted on me for eleven years! i wish to take my place in society as i have the right to do, as all women have the right to do."he suddenly grew pale again and stammered: "i do not understand you.""oh! yes; you understand me well enough. it is now three months since i had my last child, and as i am still very beautiful, and as, in spite of all your efforts you cannot spoil my figure, as you just now perceived, when you saw me on the doorstep, you think it is time that i should think of having another child.""but you are talking nonsense!""no, i am not, i am thirty, and i have had seven children, and we have been married eleven years, and you hope that this will go on for ten years longer, after which you will leave off being jealous."he seized her arm and squeezed it, saying: "i will not allow you to talk to me like that much longer.""and i shall talk to you till the end, until i have finished all i have to say to you, and if you try to prevent me, i shall raise my voice so that the two servants, who are on the box, may hear. i only allowed you to come with me for that object, for i have these witnesses who will oblige you to listen to me and to contain yourself, so now pay attention to what i say. i have always felt an antipathy to you, and i have always let you see it, for i have never lied, monsieur. you married me in spite of myself; you forced my parents, who were in embarrassed circumstances, to give me to you, because you were rich, and they obliged me to marry you in spite of my tears."so you bought me, and as soon as i was in your power, as soon as i had become your companion, ready to attach myself to you, to forget your coercive and threatening proceedings, in order that i might only remember that i ought to be a devoted wife and to love you as much as it might be possible for me to love you, you became jealous, you, as no man has ever been before, with the base, ignoble jealousy of a spy, which was as degrading to you as it was to me. i had not been married eight months when you suspected me of every perfidiousness, and you even told me so. what a disgrace! and as you could not prevent me from being beautiful and from pleasing people, from being called in drawing-rooms and also in the newspapers one of the most beautiful women in paris, you tried everything you could think of to keep admirers from me, and you hit upon the abominable idea of making me spend my life in a constant state of motherhood, until the time should come when i should disgust every man. oh, do not deny it. i did not understand it for some time, but then i guessed it. you even boasted about it to your sister, who told me of it, for she is fond of me and was disgusted at your boorish coarseness."ah! remember how you have behaved in the past! how for eleven years you have compelled me to give up all society and simply be a mother to your children. and then you would grow disgusted with me and i was sent into the country, the family chateau, among fields and meadows. and when i reappeared, fresh, pretty and unspoiled, still seductive and constantly surrounded by admirers, hoping that at last i should live a little more like a rich young society woman, you were seized with jealousy again, and you began once more to persecute me with that infamous and hateful desire from which you are suffering at this moment by my side. and it is not the desire of possessing me--for i should never have refused myself to you, but it is the wish to make me unsightly."and then that abominable and mysterious thing occurred which i was a long time in understanding (but i grew sharp by dint of watching your thoughts and actions): you attached yourself to your children with all the security which they gave you while i bore them. you felt affection for them, with all your aversion to me, and in spite of your ignoble fears, which were momentarily allayed by your pleasure in seeing me lose my symmetry."oh! how often have i noticed that joy in you! i have seen it in your eyes and guessed it. you loved your children as victories, and not because they were of your own blood. they were victories over me, over my youth, over my beauty, over my charms, over the compliments which were paid me and over those that were whispered around me without being paid to me personally. and you are proud of them, you make a parade of them, you take them out for drives in your break in the bois de boulogne and you give them donkey rides at montmorency. you take them to theatrical matinees so that you may be seen in the midst of them, so that the people may say: 'what a kind father' and that it may be repeated----"he had seized her wrist with savage brutality, and he squeezed it so violently that she was quiet and nearly cried out with the pain and he said to her in a whisper:"i love my children, do you hear? what you have just told me is disgraceful in a mother. but you belong to me; i am master--your master --i can exact from you what i like and when i like--and i have the law-on my side."he was trying to crush her fingers in the strong grip of his large, muscular hand, and she, livid with pain, tried in vain to free them from that vise which was crushing them. the agony made her breathe hard and the tears came into her eyes. "you see that i am the master and the stronger," he said. when he somewhat loosened his grip, she asked him: "do you think that i am a religious woman?"he was surprised and stammered "yes.""do you think that i could lie if i swore to the truth of anything to you before an altar on which christ's body is?""no.""will you go with me to some church?""what for?""you shall see. will you?""if you absolutely wish it, yes."she raised her voice and said: "philippe!" and the coachman, bending down a little, without taking his eyes from his horses, seemed to turn his ear alone toward his mistress, who continued: "drive to st. philippe-du- roule." and the-victoria, which had reached the entrance of the bois de boulogne returned to paris.husband and wife (did riot exchange a word further during the drive, and when the carriage stopped before the church madame de mascaret jumped out and entered it, followed by the count, a few yards distant. she went, without stopping, as far as the choir-screen, and falling on her knees at a chair, she buried her face in her hands. she prayed for a long time, and he, standing behind her could see that she was crying. she wept noiselessly, as women weep when they are in great, poignant grief. there was a kind of undulation in her body, which ended in a little sob, which was hidden and stifled by her fingers.but the comte de mascaret thought that the situation was lasting too long, and he touched her on the shoulder. that contact recalled her to herself, as if she had been burned, and getting up, she looked straight into his eyes. "this is what i have to say to you. i am afraid of nothing, whatever you may do to me. you may kill me if you like. one of your children is not yours, and one only; that i swear to you before god, who hears me here. that was the only revenge that was possible for me in return for all your abominable masculine tyrannies, in return for the penal servitude of childbearing to which you have condemned me. who was my lover? that you never will know! you may suspect every one, but you never will find out. i gave myself to him, without love and without pleasure, only for the sake of betraying you, and he also made me a mother. which is the child? that also you never will know. i have seven; try to find out! i intended to tell you this later, for one has not avenged oneself on a man by deceiving him, unless he knows it. you have driven me to confess it today. i have now finished."she hurried through the church toward the open door, expecting to hear behind her the quick step: of her husband whom she had defied and to be knocked to the ground by a blow of his fist, but she heard nothing and reached her carriage. she jumped into it at a bound, overwhelmed with anguish and breathless with fear. so she called out to the coachman: "home!" and the horses set off at a quick trot.iithe comtesse de mascaret was waiting in her room for dinner time as a criminal sentenced to death awaits the hour of his execution. what was her husband going to do? had he come home? despotic, passionate, ready for any violence as he was, what was he meditating, what had he made up his mind to do? there was no sound in the house, and every moment she looked at the clock. her lady's maid had come and dressed her for the evening and had then left the room again. eight o'clock struck and almost at the same moment there were two knocks at the door, and the butler came in and announced dinner."has the count come in?""yes, madame la comtesse. he is in the diningroom."for a little moment she felt inclined to arm herself with a small revolver which she had bought some time before, foreseeing the tragedy which was being rehearsed in her heart. but she remembered that all the children would be there, and she took nothing except a bottle of smelling salts. he rose somewhat ceremoniously from his chair. they exchanged a slight bow and sat down. the three boys with their tutor, abbe martin, were on her right and the three girls, with miss smith, their english governess, were on her left. the youngest child, who was only three months old, remained upstairs with his nurse.the abbe said grace as usual when there was no company, for the children did not come down to dinner when guests were present. then they began dinner. the countess, suffering from emotion, which she had not calculated upon, remained with her eyes cast down, while the count scrutinized now the three boys and now the three girls. with an uncertain, unhappy expression, which travelled from one to the other. suddenly pushing his wineglass from him, it broke, and the wine was spilt on the tablecloth, and at the slight noise caused by this little accident the countess started up from her chair; and for the first time they looked at each other. then, in spite of themselves, in spite of the irritation of their nerves caused by every glance, they continued to exchange looks, rapid as pistol shots.the abbe, who felt that there was some cause for embarrassment which he could not divine, attempted to begin a conversation and tried various subjects, but his useless efforts gave rise to no ideas and did not bring out a word. the countess, with feminine tact and obeying her instincts of a woman of the world, attempted to answer him two or three times, but in vain. she could not find words, in the perplexity of her mind, and her own voice almost frightened her in the silence of the large room, where nothing was heard except the slight sound of plates and knives and forks.suddenly her husband said to her, bending forward: "here, amid your children, will you swear to me that what you told me just now is true?"the hatred which was fermenting in her veins suddenly roused her, and replying to that question with the same firmness with which she had replied to his looks, she raised both her hands, the right pointing toward the boys and the left toward the girls, and said in a firm, resolute voice and without any hesitation: "on the head of my children, i swear that i have told you the truth."he got up and throwing his table napkin on the table with a movement of exasperation, he turned round and flung his chair against the wall, and then went out without another word, while she, uttering a deep sigh, as if after a first victory, went on in a calm voice: "you must not pay any attention to what your father has just said, my darlings; he was very much upset a short time ago, but he will be all right again in a few days."then she talked with the abbe and miss smith and had tender, pretty words for all her children, those sweet, tender mother's ways which unfold little hearts.when dinner was over she went into the drawing-room, all her children following her. she made the elder ones chatter, and when their bedtime came she kissed them for a long time and then went alone into her room.she waited, for she had no doubt that the count would come, and she made up her mind then, as her children were not with her, to protect herself as a woman of the world as she would protect her life, and in the pocket of her dress she put the little loaded revolver which she had bought a few days previously. the hours went by, the hours struck, and every sound was hushed in the house. only the cabs, continued to rumble through the streets, but their noise was only heard vaguely through the shuttered and curtained windows.she waited, full of nervous energy, without any fear of him now, ready for anything, and almost triumphant, for she had found means of torturing him continually during every moment of his life.but the first gleam of dawn came in through the fringe at the bottom of her curtain without his having come into her room, and then she awoke to the fact, with much amazement, that he was not coming. having locked and bolted her door, for greater security, she went to bed at last and remained there, with her eyes open, thinking and barely understanding it all, without being able to guess what he was going to do.when her maid brought her tea she at the same time handed her a letter from her husband. he told her that he was going to undertake a longish journey and in a postscript added that his lawyer would provide her with any sums of money she might require for all her expenses.iiiit was at the opera, between two acts of "robert the devil." in the stalls the men were standing up, with their hats on, their waistcoats cut very low so as to show a large amount of white shirt front, in which gold and jewelled studs glistened, and were looking at the boxes full of ladies in low dresses covered with diamonds and pearls, who were expanding like flowers in that illuminated hothouse, where the beauty of their faces and the whiteness of their shoulders seemed to bloom in order to be gazed at, amid the sound of the music and of human voices.two friends, with their backs to the orchestra, were scanning those rows of elegance, that exhibition of real or false charms, of jewels, of luxury and of pretension which displayed itself in all parts of the grand theatre, and one of them, roger de salnis, said to his companion, bernard grandin:"just look how beautiful the comtesse de mascaret still is."the older man in turn looked through his opera glasses at a tall lady in a box opposite. she appeared to be still very young, and her striking beauty seemed to attract all eyes in every corner of the house. her pale complexion, of an ivory tint, gave her the appearance of a statue, while a small diamond coronet glistened on her black hair like a streak of light.when he had looked at her for some time, bernard grandin replied with a jocular accent of sincere conviction: "you may well call her beautiful!""how old do you think she is?""wait a moment. i can tell you exactly, for i have known her since she was a child and i saw her make her debut into society when she was quite a girl. she is--she is--thirty--thirty-six.""impossible!""i am sure of it.""she looks twenty-five.""she has had seven children.""it is incredible.""and what is more, they are all seven alive, as she is a very good mother. i occasionally go to the house, which is a very quiet and pleasant one, where one may see the phenomenon of the family in the midst of society.""how very strange! and have there never been any reports about her?""never.""but what about her husband? he is peculiar, is he not?""yes and no. very likely there has been a little drama between them, one of those little domestic dramas which one suspects, never finds out exactly, but guesses at pretty closely.""what is it?""i do not know anything about it. mascaret leads a very fast life now, after being a model husband. as long as he remained a good spouse he had a shocking temper, was crabbed and easily took offence, but since he has been leading his present wild life he has become quite different, but one might surmise that he has some trouble, a worm gnawing somewhere, for he has aged very much."thereupon the two friends talked philosophically for some minutes about the secret, unknowable troubles which differences of character or perhaps physical antipathies, which were not perceived at first, give rise to in families, and then roger de salnis, who was still looking at madame de mascaret through his opera glasses, said: "it is almost incredible that that woman can have had seven children!""yes, in eleven years; after which, when she was thirty, she refused to have any more, in order to take her place in society, which she seems likely to do for many years.""poor women!""why do you pity them?""why? ah! my dear fellow, just consider! eleven years in a condition of motherhood for such a woman! what a hell! all her youth, all her beauty, every hope of success, every poetical ideal of a brilliant life sacrificed to that abominable law of reproduction which turns the normal woman into a mere machine for bringing children into the world.""what would you have? it is only nature!""yes, but i say that nature is our enemy, that we must always fight against nature, for she is continually bringing us back to an animal state. you may be sure that god has not put anything on this earth that is clean, pretty, elegant or accessory to our ideal; the human brain has done it. it is man who has introduced a little grace, beauty, unknown charm and mystery into creation by singing about it, interpreting it, by admiring it as a poet, idealizing it as an artist and by explaining it through science, doubtless making mistakes, but finding ingenious reasons, hidden grace and beauty, unknown charm and mystery in the various phenomena of nature. god created only coarse beings, full of the germs of disease, who, after a few years of bestial enjoyment, grow old and infirm, with all the ugliness and all the want of power of human decrepitude. he seems to have made them only in order that they may reproduce their species in an ignoble manner and then die like ephemeral insects. i said reproduce their species in an ignoble manner and i adhere to that expression. what is there as a matter of fact more ignoble and more repugnant than that act of reproduction of living beings, against which all delicate minds always have revolted and always will revolt? since all the organs which have been invented by this economical and malicious creator serve two purposes, why did he not choose another method of performing that sacred mission, which is the noblest and the most exalted of all human functions? the mouth, which nourishes the body by means of material food, also diffuses abroad speech and thought. our flesh renews itself of its own accord, while we are thinking about it. the olfactory organs, through which the vital air reaches the lungs, communicate all the perfumes of the world to the brain: the smell of flowers, of woods, of trees, of the sea. the ear, which enables us to communicate with our fellow men, has also allowed us to invent music, to create dreams, happiness, infinite and even physical pleasure by means of sound! but one might say that the cynical and cunning creator wished to prohibit man from ever ennobling and idealizing his intercourse with women. nevertheless man has found love, which is not a bad reply to that sly deity, and he has adorned it with so much poetry that woman often forgets the sensual part of it. those among us who are unable to deceive themselves have invented vice and refined debauchery, which is another way of laughing at god and paying homage, immodest homage, to beauty."but the normal man begets children just like an animal coupled with another by law."look at that woman! is it not abominable to think that such a jewel, such a pearl, born to be beautiful, admired, feted and adored, has spent eleven years of her life in providing heirs for the comte de mascaret?"bernard grandin replied with a laugh: "there is a great deal of truth in all that, but very few people would understand you."salnis became more and more animated. "do you know how i picture god myself?" he said. "as an enormous, creative organ beyond our ken, who scatters millions of worlds into space, just as one single fish would deposit its spawn in the sea. he creates because it is his function as god to do so, but he does not know what he is doing and is stupidly prolific in his work and is ignorant of the combinations of all kinds which are produced by his scattered germs. the human mind is a lucky little local, passing accident which was totally unforeseen, and condemned to disappear with this earth and to recommence perhaps here or elsewhere the same or different with fresh combinations of eternally new beginnings. we owe it to this little lapse of intelligence on his part that we are very uncomfortable in this world which was not made for us, which had not been prepared to receive us, to lodge and feed us or to satisfy reflecting beings, and we owe it to him also that we have to struggle without ceasing against what are still called the designs of providence, when we are really refined and civilized beings."grandin, who was listening to him attentively as he had long known the surprising outbursts of his imagination, asked him: "then you believe that human thought is the spontaneous product of blind divine generation?""naturally! a fortuitous function of the nerve centres of our brain, like the unforeseen chemical action due to new mixtures and similar also to a charge of electricity, caused by friction or the unexpected proximity of some substance, similar to all phenomena caused by the infinite and fruitful fermentation of living matter."but, my dear fellow, the truth of this must be evident to any one who looks about him. if the human mind, ordained by an omniscient creator, had been intended to be what it has become, exacting, inquiring, agitated, tormented--so different from mere animal thought and resignation--would the world which was created to receive the beings which we now are have been this unpleasant little park for small game, this salad patch, this wooded, rocky and spherical kitchen garden where your improvident providence had destined us to live naked, in caves or under trees, nourished on the flesh of slaughtered animals, our brethren, or on raw vegetables nourished by the sun and the rain?"but it is sufficient to reflect for a moment, in order to understand that this world was not made for such creatures as we are. thought, which is developed by a miracle in the nerves of the cells in our brain, powerless, ignorant and confused as it is, and as it will always remain, makes all of us who are intellectual beings eternal and wretched exiles on earth."look at this earth, as god has given it to those who inhabit it. is it not visibly and solely made, planted and covered with forests for the sake of animals? what is there for us? nothing. and for them, everything, and they have nothing to do but to eat or go hunting and eat each other, according to their instincts, for god never foresaw gentleness and peaceable manners; he only foresaw the death of creatures which were bent on destroying and devouring each other. are not the quail, the pigeon and the partridge the natural prey of the hawk? the sheep, the stag and the ox that of the great flesh-eating animals, rather than meat to be fattened and served up to us with truffles, which have been unearthed by pigs for our special benefit?"as to ourselves, the more civilized, intellectual and refined we are, the more we ought to conquer and subdue that animal instinct, which represents the will of god in us. and so, in order to mitigate our lot as brutes, we have discovered and made everything, beginning with houses, then exquisite food, sauces, sweetmeats, pastry, drink, stuffs, clothes, ornaments, beds, mattresses, carriages, railways and innumerable machines, besides arts and sciences, writing and poetry. every ideal comes from us as do all the amenities of life, in order to make our existence as simple reproducers, for which divine providence solely intended us, less monotonous and less hard."look at this theatre. is there not here a human world created by us, unforeseen and unknown to eternal fate, intelligible to our minds alone, a sensual and intellectual distraction, which has been invented solely by and for that discontented and restless little animal, man?"look at that woman, madame de mascaret. god intended her to live in a cave, naked or wrapped up in the skins of wild animals. but is she not better as she is? but, speaking of her, does any one know why and how her brute of a husband, having such a companion by his side, and especially after having been boorish enough to make her a mother seven times, has suddenly left her, to run after bad women?"grandin replied: "oh! my dear fellow, this is probably the only reason. he found that raising a family was becoming too expensive, and from reasons of domestic economy he has arrived at the same principles which you lay down as a philosopher."just then the curtain rose for the third act, and they turned round, took off their hats and sat down.ivthe comte and comtesse mascaret were sitting side by side in the carriage which was taking them home from the opera, without speaking but suddenly the husband said to his wife: "gabrielle!""what do you want?""don't you think that this has lasted long enough?""what?""the horrible punishment to which you have condemned me for the last six years?""what do you want? i cannot help it.""then tell me which of them it is.""never.""think that i can no longer see my children or feel them round me, without having my heart burdened with this doubt. tell me which of them it is, and i swear that i will forgive you and treat it like the others.""i have not the right to do so.""do you not see that i can no longer endure this life, this thought which is wearing me out, or this question which i am constantly asking myself, this question which tortures me each time i look at them? it is driving me mad.""then you have suffered a great deal?" she said."terribly. should i, without that, have accepted the horror of living by your side, and the still greater horror of feeling and knowing that there is one among them whom i cannot recognize and who prevents me from loving the others?""then you have really suffered very much?" she repeated.and he replied in a constrained and sorrowful voice:"yes, for do i not tell you every day that it is intolerable torture to me? should i have remained in that house, near you and them, if i did not love them? oh! you have behaved abominably toward me. all the affection of my heart i have bestowed upon my children, and that you know. i am for them a father of the olden time, as i was for you a husband of one of the families of old, for by instinct i have remained a natural man, a man of former days. yes, i will confess it, you have made me terribly jealous, because you are a woman of another race, of another soul, with other requirements. oh! i shall never forget the things you said to me, but from that day i troubled myself no more about you. i did not kill you, because then i should have had no means on earth of ever discovering which of our--of your children is not mine. i have waited, but i have suffered more than you would believe, for i can no longer venture to love them, except, perhaps, the two eldest; i no longer venture to look at them, to call them to me, to kiss them; i cannot take them on my knee without asking myself, 'can it be this one?' i have been correct in my behavior toward you for six years, and even kind and complaisant. tell me the truth, and i swear that i will do nothing unkind."he thought, in spite of the darkness of the carriage, that he could perceive that she was moved, and feeling certain that she was going to speak at last, he said: "i beg you, i beseech you to tell me" he said."i have been more guilty than you think perhaps," she replied, "but i could no longer endure that life of continual motherhood, and i had only one means of driving you from me. i lied before god and i lied, with my hand raised to my children's head, for i never have wronged you."he seized her arm in the darkness, and squeezing it as he had done on that terrible day of their drive in the bois de boulogne, he stammered:"is that true?""it is true."but, wild with grief, he said with a groan: "i shall have fresh doubts that will never end! when did you lie, the last time or now? how am i to believe you at present? how can one believe a woman after that? i shall never again know what i am to think. i would rather you had said to me, 'it is jacques or it is jeanne.'"the carriage drove into the courtyard of the house and when it had drawn up in front of the steps the count alighted first, as usual, and offered his wife his arm to mount the stairs. as soon as they reached the first floor he said: "may i speak to you for a few moments longer?" and she replied, "i am quite willing."they went into a small drawing-room and a footman, in some surprise, lighted the wax candles. as soon as he had left the room and they were alone the count continued: "how am i to know the truth? i have begged you a thousand times to speak, but you have remained dumb, impenetrable, inflexible, inexorable, and now to-day you tell me that you have been lying. for six years you have actually allowed me to believe such a thing! no, you are lying now, i do not know why, but out of pity for me, perhaps?"she replied in a sincere and convincing manner: "if i had not done so, i should have had four more children in the last six years!""can a mother speak like that?""oh!" she replied, "i do not feel that i am the mother of children who never have been born; it is enough for me to be the mother of those that i have and to love them with all my heart. i am a woman of the civilized world, monsieur--we all are--and we are no longer, and we refuse to be, mere females to restock the earth."she got up, but he seized her hands. "only one word, gabrielle. tell me the truth!""i have just told you. i never have dishonored you."he looked her full in the face, and how beautiful she was, with her gray eyes, like the cold sky. in her dark hair sparkled the diamond coronet, like a radiance. he suddenly felt, felt by a kind of intuition, that this grand creature was not merely a being destined to perpetuate the race, but the strange and mysterious product of all our complicated desires which have been accumulating in us for centuries but which have been turned aside from their primitive and divine object and have wandered after a mystic, imperfectly perceived and intangible beauty. there are some women like that, who blossom only for our dreams, adorned with every poetical attribute of civilization, with that ideal luxury, coquetry and esthetic charm which surround woman, a living statue that brightens our life.her husband remained standing before her, stupefied at his tardy and obscure discovery, confusedly hitting on the cause of his former jealousy and understanding it all very imperfectly, and at last lie said: "i believe you, for i feel at this moment that you are not lying, and before i really thought that you were."she put out her hand to him: "we are friends then?"he took her hand and kissed it and replied: "we are friends. thank you, gabrielle."then he went out, still looking at her, and surprised that she was still so beautiful and feeling a strange emotion arising in him.he was a journeyman carpenter, a good workman and a steady fellow, twenty-seven years old, but, although the eldest son, jacques randel had been forced to live on his family for two months, owing to the general lack of work. he had walked about seeking work for over a month and had left his native town, ville-avary, in la manche, because he could find nothing to do and would no longer deprive his family of the bread they needed themselves, when he was the strongest of them all. his two sisters earned but little as charwomen. he went and inquired at the town hall, and the mayor's secretary told him that he would find work at the labor agency, and so he started, well provided with papers and certificates, and carrying another pair of shoes, a pair of trousers and a shirt in a blue handkerchief at the end of his stick.and he had walked almost without stopping, day and night, along interminable roads, in sun and rain, without ever reaching that mysterious country where workmen find work. at first he had the fixed idea that he must only work as a carpenter, but at every carpenter's shop where he applied he was told that they had just dismissed men on account of work being so slack, and, finding himself at the end of his resources, he made up his mind to undertake any job that he might come across on the road. and so by turns he was a navvy, stableman, stonecutter; he split wood, lopped the branches of trees, dug wells, mixed mortar, tied up fagots, tended goats on a mountain, and all for a few pence, for he only obtained two or three days' work occasionally by offering himself at a shamefully low price, in order to tempt the avarice of employers and peasants.and now for a week he had found nothing, and had no money left, and nothing to eat but a piece of bread, thanks to the charity of some women from whom he had begged at house doors on the road. it was getting dark, and jacques randel, jaded, his legs failing him, his stomach empty, and with despair in his heart, was walking barefoot on the grass by the side of the road, for he was taking care of his last pair of shoes, as the other pair had already ceased to exist for a long time. it was a saturday, toward the end of autumn. the heavy gray clouds were being driven rapidly through the sky by the gusts of wind which whistled among the trees, and one felt that it would rain soon. the country was deserted at that hour on the eve of sunday. here and there in the fields there rose up stacks of wheat straw, like huge yellow mushrooms, and the fields looked bare, as they had already been sown for the next year.randel was hungry, with the hunger of some wild animal, such a hunger as drives wolves to attack men. worn out and weakened with fatigue, he took longer strides, so as not to take so many steps, and with heavy head, the blood throbbing in his temples, with red eyes and dry mouth, he grasped his stick tightly in his hand, with a longing to strike the first passerby who might be going home to supper.he looked at the sides of the road, imagining he saw potatoes dug up and lying on the ground before his eyes; if he had found any he would have gathered some dead wood, made a fire in the ditch and have had a capital supper off the warm, round vegetables with which he would first of all have warmed his cold hands. but it was too late in the year, and he would have to gnaw a raw beetroot which he might pick up in a field as he had done the day before.for the last two days he had talked to himself as he quickened his steps under the influence of his thoughts. he had never thought much hitherto, as he had given all his mind, all his simple faculties to his mechanical work. but now fatigue and this desperate search for work which he could not get, refusals and rebuffs, nights spent in the open air lying on the grass, long fasting, the contempt which he knew people with a settled abode felt for a vagabond, and that question which he was continually asked, "why do you not remain at home?" distress at not being able to use his strong arms which he felt so full of vigor, the recollection of the relations he had left at home and who also had not a penny, filled him by degrees with rage, which had been accumulating every day, every hour, every minute, and which now escaped his lips in spite of himself in short, growling sentences.as he stumbled over the stones which tripped his bare feet, he grumbled: "how wretched! how miserable! a set of hogs--to let a man die of hunger --a carpenter--a set of hogs--not two sous--not two sous--and now it is raining--a set of hogs!"he was indignant at the injustice of fate, and cast the blame on men, on all men, because nature, that great, blind mother, is unjust, cruel and perfidious, and he repeated through his clenched teeth:"a set of hogs" as he looked at the thin gray smoke which rose from the roofs, for it was the dinner hour. and, without considering that there is another injustice which is human, and which is called robbery and violence, he felt inclined to go into one of those houses to murder the inhabitants and to sit down to table in their stead.he said to himself: "i have no right to live now, as they are letting me die of hunger, and yet i only ask for work--a set of hogs!" and the pain in his limbs, the gnawing in his heart rose to his head like terrible intoxication, and gave rise to this simple thought in his brain: "i have the right to live because i breathe and because the air is the common property of everybody. so nobody has the right to leave me without bread!"a fine, thick, icy cold rain was coming down, and he stopped and murmured: "oh, misery! another month of walking before i get home." he was indeed returning home then, for he saw that he should more easily find work in his native town, where he was known--and he did not mind what he did--than on the highroads, where everybody suspected him. as the carpentering business was not prosperous, he would turn day laborer, be a mason's hodman, a ditcher, break stones on the road. if he only earned a franc a day, that would at any rate buy him something to eat.he tied the remains of his last pocket handkerchief round his neck to prevent the cold rain from running down his back and chest, but he soon found that it was penetrating the thin material of which his clothes were made, and he glanced about him with the agonized look of a man who does not know where to hide his body and to rest his head, and has no place of shelter in the whole world.night came on and wrapped the country in obscurity, and in the distance, in a meadow, he saw a dark spot on the grass; it was a cow, and so he got over the ditch by the roadside and went up to her without exactly knowing what he was doing. when he got close to her she raised her great head to him, and he thought: "if i only had a jug i could get a little milk." he looked at the cow and the cow looked at him and then, suddenly giving her a kick in the side, he said: "get up!"the animal got up slowly, letting her heavy udders bang down. then the man lay down on his back between the animal's legs and drank for a long time, squeezing her warm, swollen teats, which tasted of the cowstall, with both hands, and he drank as long as she gave any milk. but the icy rain began to fall more heavily, and he saw no place of shelter on the whole of that bare plain. he was cold, and he looked at a light which was shining among the trees in the window of a house.the cow had lain down again heavily, and he sat down by her side and stroked her head, grateful for the nourishment she had given him. the animal's strong, thick breath, which came out of her nostrils like two jets of steam in the evening air, blew on the workman's face, and he said: "you are not cold inside there!" he put his hands on her chest and under her stomach to find some warmth there, and then the idea struck him that he might pass the night beside that large, warm animal. so he found a comfortable place and laid his head on her side, and then, as he was worn out with fatigue, fell asleep immediately.he woke up, however, several times, with his back or his stomach half frozen, according as he put one or the other against the animal's flank. then he turned over to warm and dry that part of his body which had remained exposed to the night air, and soon went soundly to sleep again. the crowing of a cock woke him; the day was breaking, it was no longer raining, and the sky was bright. the cow was resting with her muzzle on the ground, and he stooped down, resting on his hands, to kiss those wide, moist nostrils, and said: "good-by, my beauty, until next time. you are a nice animal. good-by." then he put on his shoes and went off, and for two hours walked straight before him, always following the same road, and then he felt so tired that he sat down on the grass. it was broad daylight by that time, and the church bells were ringing; men in blue blouses, women in white caps, some on foot, some in carts, began to pass along the road, going to the neighboring villages to spend sunday with friends or relations.a stout peasant came in sight, driving before him a score of frightened, bleating sheep, with the help of an active dog. randel got up, and raising his cap, said: "you do not happen to have any work for a man who is dying of hunger?" but the other, giving an angry look at the vagabond, replied: "i have no work for fellows whom i meet on the road."and the carpenter went back and sat down by the side of the ditch again. he waited there for a long time, watching the country people pass and looking for a kind, compassionate face before he renewed his request, and finally selected a man in an overcoat, whose stomach was adorned with a gold chain. "i have been looking for work," he said, "for the last two months and cannot find any, and i have not a sou in my pocket." but the would-be gentleman replied: "you should have read the notice which is stuck up at the entrance to the village: 'begging is prohibited within the boundaries of this parish.' let me tell you that i am the mayor, and if you do not get out of here pretty quickly i shall have you arrested."randel, who was getting angry, replied: "have me arrested if you like; i should prefer it, for, at any rate, i should not die of hunger." and he went back and sat down by the side of his ditch again, and in about a quarter of an hour two gendarmes appeared on the road. they were walking slowly side by side, glittering in the sun with their shining hats, their yellow accoutrements and their metal buttons, as if to frighten evildoers, and to put them to flight at a distance. he knew that they were coming after him, but he did not move, for he was seized with a sudden desire to defy them, to be arrested by them, and to have his revenge later.they came on without appearing to have seen him, walking heavily, with military step, and balancing themselves as if they were doing the goose step; and then, suddenly, as they passed him, appearing to have noticed him, they stopped and looked at him angrily and threateningly, and the brigadier came up to him and asked: "what are you doing here?" "i am resting," the man replied calmly. "where do you come from?" "if i had to tell you all the places i have been to it would take me more than an hour." "where are you going to?" "to ville-avary." "where is that?" "in la manche." "is that where you belong?" "it is." "why did you leave it?" "to look for work."the brigadier turned to his gendarme and said in the angry voice of a man who is exasperated at last by an oft-repeated trick: "they all say that, these scamps. i know all about it." and then he continued: "have you any papers?" "yes, i have some." "give them to me."randel took his papers out of his pocket, his certificates, those poor, worn-out, dirty papers which were falling to pieces, and gave them to the soldier, who spelled them through, hemming and hawing, and then, having seen that they were all in order, he gave them back to randel with the dissatisfied look of a man whom some one cleverer than himself has tricked.after a few moments' further reflection, he asked him: "have you any money on you?" "no." "none whatever?" "none." "not even a sou?" "not even a son!" "how do you live then?" "on what people give me." "then you beg?" and randel answered resolutely: "yes, when i can."then the gendarme said: "i have caught you on the highroad in the act of vagabondage and begging, without any resources or trade, and so i command you to come with me." the carpenter got up and said: "wherever you please." and, placing himself between the two soldiers, even before he had received the order to do so, he added: "well, lock me up; that will at any rate put a roof over my head when it rains."and they set off toward the village, the red tiles of which could be seen through the leafless trees, a quarter of a league off. service was about to begin when they went through the village. the square was full of people, who immediately formed two lines to see the criminal pass. he was being followed by a crowd of excited children. male and female peasants looked at the prisoner between the two gendarmes, with hatred in their eyes and a longing to throw stones at him, to tear his skin with their nails, to trample him under their feet. they asked each other whether he had committed murder or robbery. the butcher, who was an ex- 'spahi', declared that he was a deserter. the tobacconist thought that he recognized him as the man who had that very morning passed a bad half- franc piece off on him, and the ironmonger declared that he was the murderer of widow malet, whom the police had been looking for for six months.in the municipal court, into which his custodians took him, randel saw the mayor again, sitting on the magisterial bench, with the schoolmaster by his side. "aha! aha!" the magistrate exclaimed, "so here you are again, my fine fellow. i told you i should have you locked up. well, brigadier, what is he charged with?""he is a vagabond without house or home, monsieur le maire, without any resources or money, so he says, who was arrested in the act of begging, but he is provided with good testimonials, and his papers are all in order.""show me his papers," the mayor said. he took them, read them, reread, returned them and then said: "search him." so they searched him, but found nothing, and the mayor seemed perplexed, and asked the workman:"what were you doing on the road this morning?" "i was looking for work." "work? on the highroad?" "how do you expect me to find any if i hide in the woods?"they looked at each other with the hatred of two wild beasts which belong to different hostile species, and the magistrate continued: "i am going to have you set at liberty, but do not be brought up before me again." to which the carpenter replied: "i would rather you locked me up; i have had enough running about the country." but the magistrate replied severely: "be silent." and then he said to the two gendarmes: "you will conduct this man two hundred yards from the village and let him continue his journey.""at any rate, give me something to eat," the workman said, but the other grew indignant: "have we nothing to do but to feed you? ah! ah! ah! that is rather too much!" but randel went on firmly: "if you let me nearly die of hunger again, you will force me to commit a crime, and then, so much the worse for you other fat fellows."the mayor had risen and he repeated: "take him away immediately or i shall end by getting angry."the two gendarmes thereupon seized the carpenter by the arms and dragged him out. he allowed them to do it without resistance, passed through the village again and found himself on the highroad once more; and when the men had accompanied him two hundred yards beyond the village, the brigadier said: "now off with you and do not let me catch you about here again, for if i do, you will know it."randel went off without replying or knowing where he was going. he walked on for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes, so stupefied that he no longer thought of anything. but suddenly, as he was passing a small house, where the window was half open, the smell of the soup and boiled meat stopped him suddenly, and hunger, fierce, devouring, maddening hunger, seized him and almost drove him against the walls of the house like a wild beast.he said aloud in a grumbling voice: "in heaven's name! they must give me some this time!" and he began to knock at the door vigorously with his stick, and as no one came he knocked louder and called out: "hey! hey! you people in there, open the door!" and then, as nothing stirred, he went up to the window and pushed it wider open with his hand, and the close warm air of the kitchen, full of the smell of hot soup, meat and cabbage, escaped into the cold outer air, and with a bound the carpenter was in the house. two places were set at the table, and no doubt the proprietors of the house, on going to church, had left their dinner on the fire, their nice sunday boiled beef and vegetable soup, while there was a loaf of new bread on the chimney-piece, between two bottles which seemed full.randel seized the bread first of all and broke it with as much violence as if he were strangling a man, and then he began to eat voraciously, swallowing great mouthfuls quickly. but almost immediately the smell of the meat attracted him to the fireplace, and, having taken off the lid of the saucepan, he plunged a fork into it and brought out a large piece of beef tied with a string. then he took more cabbage, carrots and onions until his plate was full, and, having put it on the table, he sat down before it, cut the meat into four pieces, and dined as if he had been at home. when he had eaten nearly all the meat, besides a quantity of vegetables, he felt thirsty and took one of the bottles off the mantelpiece.scarcely had he poured the liquor into his glass when he saw it was brandy. so much the better; it was warming and would instill some fire into his veins, and that would be all right, after being so cold; and he drank some. he certainly enjoyed it, for he had grown unaccustomed to it, and he poured himself out another glassful, which he drank at two gulps. and then almost immediately he felt quite merry and light-hearted from the effects of the alcohol, just as if some great happiness filled his heart.he continued to eat, but more slowly, and dipping his bread into the soup. his skin had become burning, and especially his forehead, where the veins were throbbing. but suddenly the church bells began to ring. mass was over, and instinct rather than fear, the instinct of prudence, which guides all beings and makes them clear-sighted in danger, made the carpenter get up. he put the remains of the loaf into one pocket and the brandy bottle into the other, and he furtively went to the window and looked out into the road. it was still deserted, so he jumped out and set off walking again, but instead of following the highroad he ran across the fields toward a wood he saw a little way off.he felt alert, strong, light-hearted, glad of what he had done, and so nimble that he sprang over the enclosure of the fields at a single bound, and as soon as he was under the trees he took the bottle out of his pocket again and began to drink once more, swallowing it down as lie walked, and then his ideas began to get confused, his eyes grew dim, and his legs as elastic as springs, and he started singing the old popular song:"oh! what joy, what joy it is,   to pick the sweet, wild strawberries."he was now walking on thick, damp, cool moss, and that soft carpet under his feet made him feel absurdly inclined to turn head over heels as he used to do when a child, so he took a run, turned a somersault, got up and began over again. and between each time he began to sing again:"oh! what joy, what joy it is,   to pick the sweet, wild strawberries."suddenly he found himself above a deep road, and in the road he saw a tall girl, a servant, who was returning to the village with two pails of milk. he watched, stooping down, and with his eyes as bright as those of a dog who scents a quail, but she saw him raised her head and said: "was that you singing like that?" he did not reply, however, but jumped down into the road, although it was a fall of at least six feet and when she saw him suddenly standing in front of her, she exclaimed: "oh! dear, how you frightened me!"but he did not hear her, for he was drunk, he was mad, excited by another requirement which was more imperative than hunger, more feverish than alcohol; by the irresistible fury of the man who has been deprived of everything for two months, and who is drunk; who is young, ardent and inflamed by all the appetites which nature has implanted in the vigorous flesh of men.the girl started back from him, frightened at his face, his eyes, his half-open mouth, his outstretched hands, but he seized her by the shoulders, and without a word, threw her down in the road.she let her two pails fall, and they rolled over noisily, and all the milk was spilt, and then she screamed lustily, but it was of no avail in that lonely spot.when she got up the thought of her overturned pails suddenly filled her with fury, and, taking off one of her wooden sabots, she threw it at the man to break his head if he did not pay her for her milk.but he, mistaking the reason of this sudden violent attack, somewhat sobered, and frightened at what he had done, ran off as fast as he could, while she threw stones at him, some of which hit him in the back.he ran for a long time, very long, until he felt more tired than he had ever been before. his legs were so weak that they could scarcely carry him; all his ideas were confused, he lost recollection of everything and could no longer think about anything, and so he sat down at the foot of a tree, and in five minutes was fast asleep. he was soon awakened, however, by a rough shake, and, on opening his eyes, he saw two cocked hats of shiny leather bending over him, and the two gendarmes of the morning, who were holding him and binding his arms."i knew i should catch you again," said the brigadier jeeringly. but randel got up without replying. the two men shook him, quite ready to ill treat him if he made a movement, for he was their prey now. he had become a jailbird, caught by those hunters of criminals who would not let him go again."now, start!" the brigadier said, and they set off. it was late afternoon, and the autumn twilight was setting in over the land, and in half an hour they reached the village, where every door was open, for the people had heard what had happened. peasants and peasant women and girls, excited with anger, as if every man had been robbed and every woman attacked, wished to see the wretch brought back, so that they might overwhelm him with abuse. they hooted him from the first house in the village until they reached the hotel de ville, where the mayor was waiting for him to be himself avenged on this vagabond, and as soon as he saw him approaching he cried:"ah! my fine fellow! here we are!" and he rubbed his hands, more pleased than he usually was, and continued: "i said so. i said so, the moment i saw him in the road."and then with increased satisfaction:"oh, you blackguard! oh, you dirty blackguard! you will get your twenty years, my fine fellow!"paolo saverini's   widow lived alone with her son in a poor little house on the ramparts of bonifacio. the town, built on a spur of the mountains, in places actually overhanging the sea, looks across a channel bristling with reefs, to the lower shores of sardinia. at its foot, on the other side and almost completely surrounding it, is the channel that serves as its harbour, cut in the cliff like a gigantic corridor. through a long circuit between steep walls, the channel brings to the very foot of the first houses the little italian or sardinian fishing-boats, and, every fortnight, the old steamboat that runs to and from ajaccio.upon the white mountain the group of houses form a whiter patch still. they look like the nests of wild birds, perched so upon the rock, dominating that terrible channel through which hardly ever a ship risks a passage. the unresting wind harasses the sea and eats away the bare shore, clad with a sparse covering of grass; it rushes into the ravine and ravages its two sides. the trailing wisps of white foam round the black points of countless rocks that everywhere pierce the waves, look like rags of canvas floating and heaving on the surface of the water.the widow saverini's house held for dear life to the very edge of the cliff; its three windows looked out over this wild and desolate scene.she lived there alone with her son antoine and their bitch semillante, a large, thin animal with long, shaggy hair, of the sheep-dog breed. the young man used her for hunting.one evening, after a quarrel, antoine saverini was treacherously slain by a knife-thrust from nicolas ravolati, who got away to sardinia the same night.when his old mother received his body, carried home by bystanders, she did not weep, but for a long time stayed motionless, looking at it; then, stretching out her wrinkled hand over the body, she swore vendetta against him. she would have no one stay with her, and shut herself up with the body, together with the howling dog. the animal howled continuously, standing at the foot of the bed, her head thrust towards her master, her tail held tightly between her legs. she did not stir, nor did the mother, who crouched over the body with her eyes fixed steadily upon it, and wept great silent tears.the young man, lying on his back, clad in his thick serge coat with a hole torn across the front, looked as though he slept; but everywhere there was blood; on the shirt, torn off for the first hasty dressing; on his waistcoat, on his breeches, on his face, on his hands. clots of blood had congealed in his beard and in his hair.the old mother began to speak to him. at the sound of her voice the dog was silent."there, there, you shall be avenged, my little one, my boy, my poor child. sleep, sleep, you shall be avenged, do you hear! your mother swears it! and your mother always keeps her word; you know she does."slowly she bent over him, pressing her cold lips on the dead lips.then semillante began to howl once more. she uttered long cries, monotonous, heart-rending, horrible cries.they remained there, the pair of them, the woman and the dog, till morning.antoine saverini was buried next day, and before long there was no more talk of him in bonifacio.he had left neither brothers nor close cousins. no man was there to carry on the vendetta. only his mother, an old woman, brooded over it.on the other side of the channel she watched from morning till night a white speck on the coast. it was a little sardinian village, longosardo, where corsican bandits fled for refuge when too hard pressed. they formed almost the entire population of this hamlet, facing the shores of their own country, and there they awaited a suitable moment to come home, to return to the maquis of corsica. she knew that nicolas ravolati had taken refuge in this very village.all alone, all day long, sitting by the window, she looked over there and pondered revenge. how could she do it without another's help, so feeble as she was, so near to death? but she had promised, she had sworn upon the body. she could not forget, she could not wait. what was she to do? she could no longer sleep at night, she had no more sleep nor peace; obstinately she searched for a way. the dog slumbered at her feet and sometimes, raising her head, howled into the empty spaces. since her master had gone, she often howled thus, as though she were calling him, as though her animal soul, inconsolable, had retained an ineffaceable memory of him.one night, as semillante was beginning to moan again, the mother had a sudden idea, an idea quite natural to a vindictive and ferocious savage. she meditated on it till morning, then, rising at the approach of day, she went to church. she prayed, kneeling on the stones, prostrate before god, begging him to aid her, to sustain her, to grant her poor worn-out body the strength necessary to avenge her son.then she returned home. there stood in the yard an old barrel with its sides stove in, which held the rain-water; she overturned it, emptied it, and fixed it to the ground with stakes and stones; then she chained up semillante in this kennel, and went into the house.next she began to walk up and down her room, taking no rest, her eyes still turned to the coast of sardinia. he was there, the murderer.all day long and all night long the dog howled. in the morning the old woman took her some water in a bowl, but nothing else; no soup, no bread.another day went by. semillante, exhausted, was asleep. next day her eyes were shining, her hair on end, and she tugged desperately at the chain.again the old woman gave her nothing to eat. the animal, mad with hunger, barked hoarsely. another night went by.when day broke, mother saverini went to her neighbour to ask him to give her two trusses of straw. she took the old clothes her husband had worn and stuffed them with the straw into the likeness of a human figure.having planted a post in the ground opposite semillante's kennel, she tied the dummy figure to it, which looked now as though it were standing. then she fashioned a head with a roll of old linen.the dog, surprised, looked at this straw man, and was silent, although devoured with hunger.then the woman went to the pork-butcher and bought a long piece of black pudding. she returned home, lit a wood fire in her yard, close to the kennel, and grilled the black pudding. semillante, maddened, leapt about and foamed at the mouth, her eyes fixed on the food, the flavour of which penetrated to her very stomach.then with the smoking sausage the mother made a collar for the straw man. she spent a long time lashing it round his neck, as though to stuff it right in. when it was done, she unchained the dog.with a tremendous bound the animal leapt upon the dummy's throat and with her paws on his shoulders began to rend it. she fell back with a piece of the prey in her mouth, then dashed at it again, sank her teeth into the cords, tore away a few fragments of food, fell back again, and leapt once more, ravenous.with great bites she rent away the face, and tore the whole neck to shreds.the old woman watched, motionless and silent, a gleam in her eyes. then she chained up her dog again, made her go without food for two more days, and repeated the strange performance.for three months she trained the dog to this struggle, the conquest of a meal by fangs. she no longer chained her up, but launched her upon the dummy with a sign.she had taught the dog to rend and devour it without hiding food in its throat. afterwards she would reward the dog with the gift of the black pudding she had cooked for her.as soon as she saw the man, semillante would tremble, then turn her eyes towards her mistress, who would cry "off!" in a whistling tone, raising her finger.when she judged that the time was come, mother saverini went to confession and took communion one sunday morning with an ecstatic fervour; then, putting on a man's clothes, like an old ragged beggar, she bargained with a sardinian fisherman, who took her, accompanied by the dog, to the other side of the straits.in a canvas bag she had a large piece of black pudding. semillante had had nothing to eat for two days. every minute the old woman made her smell the savoury food, stimulating her hunger with it.they came to longosardo. the corsican woman was limping slightly. she went to the baker's and inquired for nicolas ravolati's house. he had resumed his old occupation, that of a joiner. he was working alone at the back of his shop.the old woman pushed open the door and called him:"hey! nicolas!"he turned round; then, letting go of her dog, she cried:"off, off, bite him, bite him!"the maddened beast dashed forward and seized his throat.the man put out his arms, clasped the dog, and rolled upon the ground. for a few minutes he writhed, beating the ground with his feet; then he remained motionless while semillante nuzzled at his throat and tore it out in ribbons.two neighbours, sitting at their doors, plainly recollected having seen a poor old man come out with a lean black dog which ate, as it walked, something brown that its master was giving to it.in the evening the old woman returned home. that night she slept well.why did i go into that beer hall on that particular evening? i do not know. it was cold; a fine rain, a flying mist, veiled the gas lamps with a transparent fog, made the side walks reflect the light that streamed from the shop windows--lighting up the soft slush and the muddy feet of the passers-by.i was going nowhere in particular; was simply having a short walk after dinner. i had passed the credit lyonnais, the rue vivienne, and several other streets. i suddenly descried a large beer hall which was more than half full. i walked inside, with no object in view. i was not the least thirsty.i glanced round to find a place that was not too crowded, and went and sat down by the side of a man who seemed to me to be old, and who was smoking a two-sous clay pipe, which was as black as coal. from six to eight glasses piled up on the table in front of him indicated the number of "bocks" he had already absorbed. at a glance i recognized a "regular," one of those frequenters of beer houses who come in the morning when the place opens, and do not leave till evening when it is about to close. he was dirty, bald on top of his head, with a fringe of iron-gray hair falling on the collar of his frock coat. his clothes, much too large for him, appeared to have been made for him at a time when he was corpulent. one could guess that he did not wear suspenders, for he could not take ten steps without having to stop to pull up his trousers. did he wear a vest? the mere thought of his boots and of that which they covered filled me with horror. the frayed cuffs were perfectly black at the edges, as were his nails.as soon as i had seated myself beside him, this individual said to me in a quiet tone of voice:"how goes it?"i turned sharply round and closely scanned his features, whereupon he continued:"i see you do not recognize me.""no, i do not.""des barrets."i was stupefied. it was count jean des barrets, my old college chum.i seized him by the hand, and was so dumbfounded that i could find nothing to say. at length i managed to stammer out:"and you, how goes it with you?"he responded placidly:"i get along as i can.""what are you doing now?" i asked."you see what i am doing," he answered quit resignedly.i felt my face getting red. i insisted:"but every day?""every day it is the same thing," was his reply, accompanied with a thick puff of tobacco smoke.he then tapped with a sou on the top of the marble table, to attract the attention of the waiter, and called out:"waiter, two 'bocks.'"a voice in the distance repeated:"two bocks for the fourth table."another voice, more distant still, shouted out:"here they are!"immediately a man with a white apron appeared, carrying two "bocks," which he set down, foaming, on the table, spilling some of the yellow liquid on the sandy floor in his haste.des barrets emptied his glass at a single draught and replaced it on the table, while he sucked in the foam that had been left on his mustache. he next asked:"what is there new?"i really had nothing new to tell him. i stammered:"nothing, old man. i am a business man."in his monotonous tone of voice he said:"indeed, does it amuse you?""no, but what can i do? one must do something!""why should one?""so as to have occupation.""what's the use of an occupation? for my part, i do nothing at all, as you see, never anything. when one has not a sou i can understand why one should work. but when one has enough to live on, what's the use? what is the good of working? do you work for yourself, or for others? if you work for yourself, you do it for your own amusement, which is all right; if you work for others, you are a fool."then, laying his pipe on the marble table, he called out anew:"waiter, a 'bock.'" and continued: "it makes me thirsty to keep calling so. i am not accustomed to that sort of thing. yes, yes, i do nothing. i let things slide, and i am growing old. in dying i shall have nothing to regret. my only remembrance will be this beer hall. no wife, no children, no cares, no sorrows, nothing. that is best."he then emptied the glass which had been brought him, passed his tongue over his lips, and resumed his pipe.i looked at him in astonishment, and said:"but you have not always been like that?""pardon me; ever since i left college.""that is not a proper life to lead, my dear fellow; it is simply horrible. come, you must have something to do, you must love something, you must have friends.""no, i get up at noon, i come here, i have my breakfast, i drink my beer, i remain until the evening, i have my dinner, i drink beer. then about half-past one in the morning, i go home to bed, because the place closes up; that annoys me more than anything. in the last ten years i have passed fully six years on this bench, in my corner; and the other four in my bed, nowhere else. i sometimes chat with the regular customers.""but when you came to paris what did you do at first?""i paid my devoirs to the cafe de medicis.""what next?""next i crossed the water and came here.""why did you take that trouble?""what do you mean? one cannot remain all one's life in the latin quarter. the students make too much noise. now i shall not move again. waiter, a 'bock.'"i began to think that he was making fun of me, and i continued:"come now, be frank. you have been the victim of some great sorrow; some disappointment in love, no doubt! it is easy to see that you are a man who has had some trouble. what age are you?""i am thirty, but i look forty-five, at least."i looked him straight in the face. his wrinkled, ill-shaven face gave one the impression that he was an old man. on the top of his head a few long hairs waved over a skin of doubtful cleanliness. he had enormous eyelashes, a heavy mustache, and a thick beard. suddenly i had a kind of vision, i know not why, of a basin filled with dirty water in which all that hair had been washed. i said to him:"you certainly look older than your age. you surely must have experienced some great sorrow."he replied:"i tell you that i have not. i am old because i never go out into the air. nothing makes a man deteriorate more than the life of a cafe."i still could not believe him."you must surely also have been married? one could not get as bald- headed as you are without having been in love."he shook his head, shaking dandruff down on his coat as he did so."no, i have always been virtuous."and, raising his eyes toward the chandelier which heated our heads, he said:"if i am bald, it is the fault of the gas. it destroys the hair. waiter, a 'bock.' are you not thirsty?""no, thank you. but you really interest me. since when have you been so morbid? your life is not normal, it is not natural. there is something beneath it all.""yes, and it dates from my infancy. i received a great shock when i was very young, and that turned my life into darkness which will last to the end.""what was it?""you wish to know about it? well, then, listen. you recall, of course, the castle in which i was brought up, for you used to spend five or six months there during vacation. you remember that large gray building, in the middle of a great park, and the long avenues of oaks which opened to the four points of the compass. you remember my father and mother, both of whom were ceremonious, solemn, and severe."i worshipped my mother; i was afraid of my father; but i respected both, accustomed always as i was to see every one bow before them. they were monsieur le comte and madame la comtesse to all the country round, and our neighbors, the tannemares, the ravelets, the brennevilles, showed them the utmost consideration."i was then thirteen years old. i was happy, pleased with everything, as one is at that age, full of the joy of life."well, toward the end of september, a few days before returning to college, as i was playing about in the shrubbery of the park, among the branches and leaves, as i was crossing a path, i saw my father and mother, who were walking along."i recall it as though it were yesterday. it was a very windy day. the whole line of trees swayed beneath the gusts of wind, groaning, and seeming to utter cries-those dull, deep cries that forests give out during a tempest."the falling leaves, turning yellow, flew away like birds, circling and falling, and then running along the path like swift animals."evening came on. it was dark in the thickets. the motion of the wind and of the branches excited me, made me tear about as if i were crazy, and howl in imitation of the wolves."as soon as i perceived my parents, i crept furtively toward them, under the branches, in order to surprise them, as though i had been a veritable prowler. but i stopped in fear a few paces from them. my father, who was in a terrible passion, cried:"'your mother is a fool; moreover, it is not a question of your mother. it is you. i tell you that i need this money, and i want you to sign this.'"my mother replied in a firm voice:"'i will not sign it. it is jean's fortune. i shall guard it for him and i will not allow you to squander it with strange women, as you have your own heritage.'"then my father, trembling with rage, wheeled round and, seizing his wife by the throat, began to slap her with all his might full in the face with his disengaged hand."my mother's hat fell off, her hair became loosened and fell over her shoulders; she tried to parry the blows, but she could not do so. and my father, like a madman, kept on striking her. my mother rolled over on the ground, covering her face with her hands. then he turned her over on her back in order to slap her still more, pulling away her hands, which were covering her face."as for me, my friend, it seemed as though the world was coming to an end, that the eternal laws had changed. i experienced the overwhelming dread that one has in presence of things supernatural, in presence of irreparable disasters. my childish mind was bewildered, distracted. i began to cry with all my might, without knowing why; a prey to a fearful dread, sorrow, and astonishment. my father heard me, turned round, and, on seeing me, started toward me. i believe that he wanted to kill me, and i fled like a hunted animal, running straight ahead into the thicket."i ran perhaps for an hour, perhaps for two. i know not. darkness set in. i sank on the grass, exhausted, and lay there dismayed, frantic with fear, and devoured by a sorrow capable of breaking forever the heart of a poor child. i was cold, hungry, perhaps. at length day broke. i was afraid to get up, to walk, to return home, to run farther, fearing to encounter my father, whom i did not wish to see again."i should probably have died of misery and of hunger at the foot of a tree if the park guard had not discovered me and led me home by force."i found my parents looking as usual. my mother alone spoke to me "'how you frightened me, you naughty boy. i lay awake the whole night.'"i did not answer, but began to weep. my father did not utter a single word."eight days later i returned to school."well, my friend, it was all over with me. i had witnessed the other side of things, the bad side. i have not been able to perceive the good side since that day. what has taken place in my mind, what strange phenomenon has warped my ideas, i do not know. but i no longer had a taste for anything, a wish for anything, a love for anybody, a desire for anything whatever, any ambition, or any hope. and i always see my poor mother on the ground, in the park, my father beating her. my mother died some years later; my, father still lives. i have not seen him since. waiter, a 'bock.'"a waiter brought him his "bock," which he swallowed at a gulp. but, in taking up his pipe again, trembling as he was, he broke it. "confound it!" he said, with a gesture of annoyance. "that is a real sorrow. it will take me a month to color another!"and he called out across the vast hall, now reeking with smoke and full of men drinking, his everlasting: "garcon, un 'bock'--and a new pipe."it was yesterday, the 31st of december.i had just finished breakfast with my old friend georges garin when the servant handed him a letter covered with seals and foreign stamps.georges said:"will you excuse me?""certainly."and so he began to read the letter, which was written in a large english handwriting, crossed and recrossed in every direction. he read them slowly, with serious attention and the interest which we only pay to things which touch our hearts.then he put the letter on the mantelpiece and said:"that was a curious story! i've never told you about it, i think. yet it was a sentimental adventure, and it really happened to me. that was a strange new year's day, indeed! it must have been twenty years ago, for i was then thirty and am now fifty years old."i was then an inspector in the maritime insurance company, of which i am now director. i had arranged to pass new year's day in paris--since it is customary to make that day a fete--when i received a letter from the manager, asking me to proceed at once to the island of re, where a three- masted vessel from saint-nazaire, insured by us, had just been driven ashore. it was then eight o'clock in the morning. i arrived at the office at ten to get my advices, and that evening i took the express, which put me down in la rochelle the next day, the 31st of december."i had two hours to wait before going aboard the boat for re. so i made a tour of the town. it is certainly a queer city, la rochelle, with strong characteristics of its own streets tangled like a labyrinth, sidewalks running under endless arcaded galleries like those of the rue de rivoli, but low, mysterious, built as if to form a suitable setting for conspirators and making a striking background for those old-time wars, the savage heroic wars of religion. it is indeed the typical old huguenot city, conservative, discreet, with no fine art to show, with no wonderful monuments, such as make rouen; but it is remarkable for its severe, somewhat sullen look; it is a city of obstinate fighters, a city where fanaticism might well blossom, where the faith of the calvinists became enthusiastic and which gave birth to the plot of the 'four sergeants.'"after i had wandered for some time about these curious streets, i went aboard the black, rotund little steamboat which was to take me to the island of re. it was called the jean guiton. it started with angry puffings, passed between the two old towers which guard the harbor, crossed the roadstead and issued from the mole built by richelieu, the great stones of which can be seen at the water's edge, enclosing the town like a great necklace. then the steamboat turned to the right."it was one of those sad days which give one the blues, tighten the heart and take away all strength and energy and force-a gray, cold day, with a heavy mist which was as wet as rain, as cold as frost, as bad to breathe as the steam of a wash-tub."under this low sky of dismal fog the shallow, yellow, sandy sea of all practically level beaches lay without a wrinkle, without a movement, without life, a sea of turbid water, of greasy water, of stagnant water. the jean guiton passed over it, rolling a little from habit, dividing the smooth, dark blue water and leaving behind a few waves, a little splashing, a slight swell, which soon calmed down."i began to talk to the captain, a little man with small feet, as round as his boat and rolling in the same manner. i wanted some details of the disaster on which i was to draw up a report. a great square-rigged three-master, the marie joseph, of saint-nazaire, had gone ashore one night in a hurricane on the sands of the island of re."the owner wrote us that the storm had thrown the ship so far ashore that it was impossible to float her and that they had to remove everything which could be detached with the utmost possible haste. nevertheless i must examine the situation of the wreck, estimate what must have been her condition before the disaster and decide whether all efforts had been used to get her afloat. i came as an agent of the company in order to give contradictory testimony, if necessary, at the trial."on receipt of my report, the manager would take what measures he might think necessary to protect our interests."the captain of the jean guiton knew all about the affair, having been summoned with his boat to assist in the attempts at salvage."he told me the story of the disaster. the marie joseph, driven by a furious gale lost her bearings completely in the night, and steering by chance over a heavy foaming sea--'a milk-soup sea,' said the captain--had gone ashore on those immense sand banks which make the coasts of this country look like limitless saharas when the tide is low."while talking i looked around and ahead. between the ocean and the lowering sky lay an open space where the eye could see into the distance. we were following a coast. i asked:"'is that the island of re?'"'yes, sir.'"and suddenly the captain stretched his right hand out before us, pointed to something almost imperceptible in the open sea, and said:"'there's your ship!'"'the marie joseph!'"'yes.'"i was amazed. this black, almost imperceptible speck, which looked to me like a rock, seemed at least three miles from land."i continued:"'but, captain, there must be a hundred fathoms of water in that place.'"he began to laugh."'a hundred fathoms, my child! well, i should say about two!'"he was from bordeaux. he continued:"'it's now nine-forty, just high tide. go down along the beach with your hands in your pockets after you've had lunch at the hotel du dauphin, and i'll wager that at ten minutes to three, or three o'clock, you'll reach the wreck without wetting your feet, and have from an hour and three- quarters to two hours aboard of her; but not more, or you'll be caught. the faster the sea goes out the faster it comes back. this coast is as flat as a turtle! but start away at ten minutes to five, as i tell you, and at half-past seven you will be again aboard of the jean guiton, which will put you down this same evening on the quay at la rochelle.'"i thanked the captain and i went and sat down in the bow of the steamer to get a good look at the little city of saint-martin, which we were now rapidly approaching."it was just like all small seaports which serve as capitals of the barren islands scattered along the coast--a large fishing village, one foot on sea and one on shore, subsisting on fish and wild fowl, vegetables and shell-fish, radishes and mussels. the island is very low and little cultivated, yet it seems to be thickly populated. however, i did not penetrate into the interior."after breakfast i climbed across a little promontory, and then, as the tide was rapidly falling, i started out across the sands toward a kind of black rock which i could just perceive above the surface of the water, out a considerable distance."i walked quickly over the yellow plain. it was elastic, like flesh and seemed to sweat beneath my tread. the sea had been there very lately. now i perceived it at a distance, escaping out of sight, and i no longer could distinguish the line which separated the sands from ocean. i felt as though i were looking at a gigantic supernatural work of enchantment. the atlantic had just now been before me, then it had disappeared into the sands, just as scenery disappears through a trap; and i was now walking in the midst of a desert. only the feeling, the breath of the salt-water, remained in me. i perceived the smell of the wrack, the smell of the sea, the good strong smell of sea coasts. i walked fast; i was no longer cold. i looked at the stranded wreck, which grew in size as i approached, and came now to resemble an enormous shipwrecked whale."it seemed fairly to rise out of the ground, and on that great, flat, yellow stretch of sand assumed wonderful proportions. after an hour's walk i at last reached it. it lay upon its side, ruined and shattered, its broken bones showing as though it were an animal, its bones of tarred wood pierced with great bolts. the sand had already invaded it, entering it by all the crannies, and held it and refused to let it go. it seemed to have taken root in it. the bow had entered deep into this soft, treacherous beach, while the stern, high in air, seemed to cast at heaven, like a cry of despairing appeal, the two white words on the black planking, marie joseph."i climbed upon this carcass of a ship by the lowest side; then, having reached the deck, i went below. the daylight, which entered by the stove-in hatches and the cracks in the sides, showed me dimly long dark cavities full of demolished woodwork. they contained nothing but sand, which served as foot-soil in this cavern of planks."i began to take some notes about the condition of the ship. i was seated on a broken empty cask, writing by the light of a great crack, through which i could perceive the boundless stretch of the strand. a strange shivering of cold and loneliness ran over my skin from time to time, and i would often stop writing for a moment to listen to the mysterious noises in the derelict: the noise of crabs scratching the planking with their crooked claws; the noise of a thousand little creatures of the sea already crawling over this dead body or else boring into the wood."suddenly, very near me, i heard human voices. i started as though i had seen a ghost. for a second i really thought i was about to see drowned men rise from the sinister depths of the hold, who would tell me about their death. at any rate, it did not take me long to swing myself on deck. there, standing by the bows, was a tall englishman with three young misses. certainly they were a good deal more frightened at seeing this sudden apparition on the abandoned three-master than i was at seeing them. the youngest girl turned and ran, the two others threw their arms round their father. as for him, he opened his mouth--that was the only sign of emotion which he showed."then, after several seconds, he spoke:"'mosieu, are you the owner of this ship?'"'i am.'"'may i go over it?'"'you may.'"then he uttered a long sentence in english, in which i only distinguished the word 'gracious,' repeated several times."as he was looking for a place to climb up i showed him the easiest way, and gave him a hand. he climbed up. then we helped up the three girls, who had now quite recovered their composure. they were charming, especially the oldest, a blonde of eighteen, fresh as a flower, and very dainty and pretty! ah, yes! the pretty englishwomen have indeed the look of tender sea fruit. one would have said of this one that she had just risen out of the sands and that her hair had kept their tint. they all, with their exquisite freshness, make you think of the delicate colors of pink sea-shells and of shining pearls hidden in the unknown depths of the ocean."she spoke french a little better than her father and acted as interpreter. i had to tell all about the shipwreck, and i romanced as though i had been present at the catastrophe. then the whole family descended into the interior of the wreck. as soon as they had penetrated into this sombre, dimly lit cavity they uttered cries of astonishment and admiration. suddenly the father and his three daughters were holding sketch-books in their hands, which they had doubtless carried hidden somewhere in their heavy weather-proof clothes, and were all beginning at once to make pencil sketches of this melancholy and weird place."they had seated themselves side by side on a projecting beam, and the four sketch-books on the eight knees were being rapidly covered with little black lines which were intended to represent the half-opened hulk of the marie joseph."i continued to inspect the skeleton of the ship, and the oldest girl talked to me while she worked."they had none of the usual english arrogance; they were simple honest hearts of that class of continuous travellers with which england covers the globe. the father was long and thin, with a red face framed in white whiskers, and looking like a living sandwich, a piece of ham carved like a face between two wads of hair. the daughters, who had long legs like young storks, were also thin-except the oldest. all three were pretty, especially the tallest."she had such a droll way of speaking, of laughing, of understanding and of not understanding, of raising her eyes to ask a question (eyes blue as the deep ocean), of stopping her drawing a moment to make a guess at what you meant, of returning once more to work, of saying 'yes' or 'no'--that i could have listened and looked indefinitely."suddenly she murmured:"'i hear a little sound on this boat.'"i listened and i immediately distinguished a low, steady, curious sound. i rose and looked out of the crack and gave a scream. the sea had come up to us; it would soon surround us!"we were on deck in an instant. it was too late. the water circled us about and was running toward the coast at tremendous speed. no, it did not run, it glided, crept, spread like an immense, limitless blot. the water was barely a few centimeters deep, but the rising flood had gone so far that we no longer saw the vanishing line of the imperceptible tide. "the englishman wanted to jump. i held him back. flight was impossible because of the deep places which we had been obliged to go round on our way out and into which we should fall on our return."there was a minute of horrible anguish in our hearts. then the little english girl began to smile and murmured:"'it is we who are shipwrecked.'"i tried to laugh, but fear held me, a fear which was cowardly and horrid and base and treacherous like the tide. all the danger which we ran appeared to me at once. i wanted to shriek: 'help!' but to whom?"the two younger girls were clinging to their father, who looked in consternation at the measureless sea which hedged us round about."the night fell as swiftly as the ocean rose--a lowering, wet, icy night."i said:"'there's nothing to do but to stay on the ship:"the englishman answered:"'oh, yes!'"and we waited there a quarter of an hour, half an hour, indeed i don't know how long, watching that creeping water growing deeper as it swirled around us, as though it were playing on the beach, which it had regained."one of the young girls was cold, and we went below to shelter ourselves from the light but freezing wind that made our skins tingle."i leaned over the hatchway. the ship was full of water. so we had to cower against the stern planking, which shielded us a little."darkness was now coming on, and we remained huddled together. i felt the shoulder of the little english girl trembling against mine, her teeth chattering from time to time. but i also felt the gentle warmth of her body through her ulster, and that warmth was as delicious to me as a kiss. we no longer spoke; we sat motionless, mute, cowering down like animals in a ditch when a hurricane is raging. and, nevertheless, despite the night, despite the terrible and increasing danger, i began to feel happy that i was there, glad of the cold and the peril, glad of the long hours of darkness and anguish that i must pass on this plank so near this dainty, pretty little girl."i asked myself, 'why this strange sensation of well-being and of joy?' "why! does one know? because she was there? who? she, a little unknown english girl? i did not love her, i did not even know her. and for all that, i was touched and conquered. i wanted to save her, to sacrifice myself for her, to commit a thousand follies! strange thing! how does it happen that the presence of a woman overwhelms us so? is it the power of her grace which enfolds us? is it the seduction of her beauty and youth, which intoxicates one like wine?"is it not rather the touch of love, of love the mysterious, who seeks constantly to unite two beings, who tries his strength the instant he has put a man and a woman face to face?"the silence of the darkness became terrible, the stillness of the sky dreadful, because we could hear vaguely about us a slight, continuous sound, the sound of the rising tide and the monotonous plashing of the water against the ship."suddenly i heard the sound of sobs. the youngest of the girls was crying. her father tried to console her, and they began to talk in their own tongue, which i did not understand. i guessed that he was reassuring her and that she was still afraid."i asked my neighbor:"'you are not too cold, are you, mademoiselle?'"'oh, yes. i am very cold.'"i offered to give her my cloak; she refused it.but i had taken it off and i covered her with it against her will. in the short struggle her hand touched mine. it made a delicious thrill run through my body."for some minutes the air had been growing brisker, the dashing of the water stronger against the flanks of the ship. i raised myself; a great gust of wind blew in my face. the wind was rising!"the englishman perceived this at the same time that i did and said simply:"'this is bad for us, this----'"of course it was bad, it was certain death if any breakers, however feeble, should attack and shake the wreck, which was already so shattered and disconnected that the first big sea would carry it off."so our anguish increased momentarily as the squalls grew stronger and stronger. now the sea broke a little, and i saw in the darkness white lines appearing and disappearing, lines of foam, while each wave struck the marie joseph and shook her with a short quiver which went to our hearts."the english girl was trembling. i felt her shiver against me. and i had a wild desire to take her in my arms."down there, before and behind us, to the left and right, lighthouses were shining along the shore--lighthouses white, yellow and red, revolving like the enormous eyes of giants who were watching us, waiting eagerly for us to disappear. one of them in especial irritated me. it went out every thirty seconds and it lit up again immediately. it was indeed an eye, that one, with its lid incessantly lowered over its fiery glance."from time to time the englishman struck a match to see the hour; then he put his watch back in his pocket. suddenly he said to me, over the heads of his daughters, with tremendous gravity:"'i wish you a happy new year, mosieu.'"it was midnight. i held out my hand, which he pressed. then he said something in english, and suddenly he and his daughters began to sing 'god save the queen,' which rose through the black and silent air and vanished into space."at first i felt a desire to laugh; then i was seized by a powerful, strange emotion."it was something sinister and superb, this chant of the shipwrecked, the condemned, something like a prayer and also like something grander, something comparable to the ancient 'ave caesar morituri te salutant.'"when they had finished i asked my neighbor to sing a ballad alone, anything she liked, to make us forget our terrors. she consented, and immediately her clear young voice rang out into the night. she sang something which was doubtless sad, because the notes were long drawn out and hovered, like wounded birds, above the waves."the sea was rising now and beating upon our wreck. as for me, i thought only of that voice. and i thought also of the sirens. if a ship had passed near by us what would the sailors have said? my troubled spirit lost itself in the dream! a siren! was she not really a siren, this daughter of the sea, who had kept me on this worm-eaten ship and who was soon about to go down with me deep into the waters?"but suddenly we were all five rolling on the deck, because the marie joseph had sunk on her right side. the english girl had fallen upon me, and before i knew what i was doing, thinking that my last moment was come, i had caught her in my arms and kissed her cheek, her temple and her hair."the ship did not move again, and we, we also, remained motionless."the father said, 'kate!' the one whom i was holding answered 'yes' and made a movement to free herself. and at that moment i should have wished the ship to split in two and let me fall with her into the sea."the englishman continued:"'a little rocking; it's nothing. i have my three daughters safe.'"not having seen the oldest, he had thought she was lost overboard!"i rose slowly, and suddenly i made out a light on the sea quite close to us. i shouted; they answered. it was a boat sent out in search of us by the hotelkeeper, who had guessed at our imprudence."we were saved. i was in despair. they picked us up off our raft and they brought us back to saint-martin."the englishman began to rub his hand and murmur:"'a good supper! a good supper!'"we did sup. i was not gay. i regretted the marie joseph."we had to separate the next day after much handshaking and many promises to write. they departed for biarritz. i wanted to follow them."i was hard hit. i wanted to ask this little girl to marry me. if we had passed eight days together, i should have done so! how weak and incomprehensible a man sometimes is!"two years passed without my hearing a word from them. then i received a letter from new york. she was married and wrote to tell me. and since then we write to each other every year, on new year's day. she tells me about her life, talks of her children, her sisters, never of her husband! why? ah! why? and as for me, i only talk of the marie joseph. that was perhaps the only woman i have ever loved--no--that i ever should have loved. ah, well! who can tell? circumstances rule one. and then--and then--all passes. she must be old now; i should not know her. ah! she of the bygone time, she of the wreck! what a creature! divine! she writes me her hair is white. that caused me terrible pain. ah! her yellow hair. no, my english girl exists no longer. how sad it all is!""the comtesse samoris.""that lady in black over there?""the very one. she's wearing mourning for her daughter, whom she killed.""you don't mean that seriously? how did she die?""oh! it is a very simple story, without any crime in it, any violence.""then what really happened?""almost nothing. many courtesans are born to be virtuous women, they say; and many women called virtuous are born to be courtesans--is that not so? now, madame samoris, who was born a courtesan, had a daughter born a virtuous woman, that's all.""i don't quite understand you.""i'll--explain what i mean. the comtesse is nothing but a common, ordinary parvenue originating no one knows where. a hungarian or wallachian countess or i know not what. she appeared one winter in apartments she had taken in the champs elysees, that quarter for adventurers and adventuresses, and opened her drawing-room to the first comer or to any one that turned up."i went there. why? you will say. i really can't tell you. i went there, as every one goes to such places because the women are facile and the men are dishonest. you know that set composed of filibusters with varied decorations, all noble, all titled, all unknown at the embassies, with the exception of those who are spies. all talk of their honor without the slightest occasion for doing so, boast of their ancestors, tell you about their lives, braggarts, liars, sharpers, as dangerous as the false cards they have up their sleeves, as delusive as their names-- in short, the aristocracy of the bagnio."i adore these people. they are interesting to study, interesting to know, amusing to understand, often clever, never commonplace like public functionaries. their wives are always pretty, with a slight flavor of foreign roguery, with the mystery of their existence, half of it perhaps spent in a house of correction. they have, as a rule, magnificent eyes and incredible hair. i adore them also."madame samoris is the type of these adventuresses, elegant, mature and still beautiful. charming feline creatures, you feel that they are vicious to the marrow of their bones. you find them very amusing when you visit them; they give card parties; they have dances and suppers; in short, they offer you all the pleasures of social life."and she had a daughter--a tall, fine-looking girl, always ready for amusement, always full of laughter and reckless gaiety--a true adventuress' daughter--but, at the same time, an innocent, unsophisticated, artless girl, who saw nothing, knew nothing, understood nothing of all the things that happened in her father's house."the girl was simply a puzzle to me. she was a mystery. she lived amid those infamous surroundings with a quiet, tranquil ease that was either terribly criminal or else the result of innocence. she sprang from the filth of that class like a beautiful flower fed on corruption.""how do you know about them?""how do i know? that's the funniest part of the business! one morning there was a ring at my door, and my valet came up to tell me that m. joseph bonenthal wanted to speak to me. i said directly:'and who is this gentleman?' my valet replied: 'i don't know, monsieur; perhaps 'tis some one that wants employment.' and so it was. the man wanted me to take him as a servant. i asked him where he had been last. he answered: 'with the comtesse samoris.' 'ah!' said i, 'but my house is not a bit like hers.' 'i know that well, monsieur,' he said, 'and that's the very reason i want to take service with monsieur. i've had enough of these people: a man may stay a little while with them, but he won't remain long with them.' i required an additional man servant at the time and so i took him."a month later mademoiselle yvette samoris died mysteriously, and here are all the details of her death i could gather from joseph, who got them from his sweetheart, the comtesse's chambermaid."it was a ball night, and two newly arrived guests were chatting behind a door. mademoiselle yvette, who had just been dancing, leaned against this door to get a little air."they did not see her approaching, but she heard what they were saying. and this was what they said:"'but who is the father of the girl?'"'a russian, it appears; count rouvaloff. he never comes near the mother now.'"'and who is the reigning prince to-day?'"'that english prince standing near the window; madame samoris adores him. but her adoration of any one never lasts longer than a month or six weeks. nevertheless, as you see, she has a large circle of admirers. all are called--and nearly all are chosen. that kind of thing costs a good deal, but--hang it, what can you expect?'"'and where did she get this name of samoris?'"'from the only man perhaps that she ever loved--a jewish banker from berlin who goes by the name of samuel morris.'"'good. thanks. now that i know what kind of woman she is and have seen her, i'm off!'"what a shock this was to the mind of a young girl endowed with all the instincts of a virtuous woman! what despair overwhelmed that simple soul! what mental tortures quenched her unbounded gaiety, her delightful laughter, her exultant satisfaction with life! what a conflict took place in that youthful heart up to the moment when the last guest had left! those were things that joseph could not tell me. but, the same night, yvette abruptly entered her mother's room just as the comtesse was getting into bed, sent out the lady's maid, who was close to the door, and, standing erect and pale and with great staring eyes, she said:"'mamma, listen to what i heard a little while ago during the ball.'"and she repeated word for word the conversation just as i told it to you."the comtesse was so stunned that she did not know what to say in reply at first. when she recovered her self-possession she denied everything and called god to witness that there was no truth in the story."the young girl went away, distracted but not convinced. and she began to watch her mother."i remember distinctly the strange alteration that then took place in her. she became grave and melancholy. she would fix on us her great earnest eyes as if she wanted to read what was at the bottom of our hearts. we did not know what to think of her and used to imagine that she was looking out for a husband."one evening she overheard her mother talking to her admirer and later saw them together, and her doubts were confirmed. she was heartbroken, and after telling her mother what she had seen, she said coldly, like a man of business laying down the terms of an agreement:"'here is what i have determined to do, mamma: we will both go away to some little town, or rather into the country. we will live there quietly as well as we can. your jewelry alone may be called a fortune. if you wish to marry some honest man, so much the better; still better will it be if i can find one. if you don't consent to do this, i will kill myself.'"this time the comtesse ordered her daughter to go to bed and never to speak again in this manner, so unbecoming in the mouth of a child toward her mother."yvette's answer to this was: 'i give you a month to reflect. if, at the end of that month, we have not changed our way of living, i will kill myself, since there is no other honorable issue left to my life.'"and she left the room."at the end of a month the comtesse samoris had resumed her usual entertainments, as though nothing had occurred. one day, under the pretext that she had a bad toothache, yvette purchased a few drops of chloroform from a neighboring chemist. the next day she purchased more, and every time she went out she managed to procure small doses of the narcotic. she filled a bottle with it."one morning she was found in bed, lifeless and already quite cold, with a cotton mask soaked in chloroform over her face."her coffin was covered with flowers, the church was hung in white. there was a large crowd at the funeral ceremony."ah! well, if i had known--but you never can know--i would have married that girl, for she was infernally pretty.""and what became of the mother?""oh! she shed a lot of tears over it. she has only begun to receive visits again for the past week.""and what explanation is given of the girl's death?""oh! they pretended that it was an accident caused by a new stove, the mechanism of which got out of order. as a good many such accidents have occurred, the thing seemed probable enough."as you leave the port of vecchio, heading inland in a northwesterly direction, the ground rises fairly steeply and, after a three-hour journey along winding paths obstructed by great masses of rock, and sometimes broken by ravines, you come to the edge of a very extensive maquis. this is the home of the corsican shepherds, and of those who have fallen foul of the law. i should explain that, in order to save themselves the trouble of manuring their fields, corsican farmers set fire to an area of woodland. too bad if the flames spread further than intended; come what may, one can be sure of a good crop if one sows seeds on this land that has been fertilized by the ash from the trees that grew on it. when the ears of grain have been harvested (they leave the straw, which would be troublesome to gather), the tree-roots that have remained in the soil, untouched by the flames, sprout thick clumps of shoots the following spring, which within a few years grow to a height of seven or eight feet. this kind of dense brushwood is known as maquis. it is made up of various species of tree and shrub, tangled and intertwined at nature's whim. a man would need an axe to force a way through, and sometimes the maquis can be so dense and overgrown that even the wild sheep cannot penetrate it.if you have killed a man, go to the maquis above porto-vecchio, and you will be able to live in safety there, with a good rifle, gunpowder and bullets. don't forget to take a brown cloak with a hood, which does duty for blanket and mattress. the shepherds will give you milk, cheese and chestnuts; and you will have nothing to fear from the law or from the dead man's relatives, except when you have to go down to the town to replenish your ammunition. when i was in corsica in 18-, mateo falcone had his home half a league from the maquis. he was a man of some means for that district, who lived nobly-that is, without working-from the produce of his flocks that were driven to pasture on the mountains round and about by shepherds who lived like nomads. when i saw him, two years after the event i am about to relate, he looked 50 years old at most. picture to yourself a small but robust man with tightly curled, jet-black hair, an aquiline nose, thin lips, large bright eyes, and a complexion tanned like cappuccino with cream. his skill with a rifle was said to be extraordinary, even for corsica, where there are so many good shots. for instance, mateo would never have shot a wild sheep with buckshot, but would kill it at a hundred and twenty paces with a bullet in the head or in the shoulder, as the mood took him. he used his weapons with as much ease by night as by day, and i have been told of one of his feats of skill which may perhaps seem incredible to anyone who has never travelled in corsica. at eighty paces, a lighted candle would be placed behind a transparent sheet of paper the size of a plate. he would take aim, then the candle would be extinguished, and one minute later, in total darkness, he would fire, piercing the paper three times out of four.with such an extra-ordinary talent, mateo falcone had earned himself a great reputation. he was said to be both a dangerous enemy and a staunch friend; moreover, he was always ready to do his moral duty, gave alms to the poor, and lived on good terms with everyone in the district of porto-vecchio. but rumor had it that in corte, where he had taken a wife, he had disposed most effectively of a rival, who was said to be as formidable in war as in love: at any rate, mateo was given credit for a rifle-shot which caught the rival off his guard as he was standing shaving at a small mirror hanging in his window. when the affair had blown over, mateo married. his wife giuseppa first bore him three daughters (to his fury), then finally a son, whom he named fortunato. this boy was the hope of the family, the heir to his father's name. the daughters had married well: their father could count on the daggers and rifles of his sons-in-law if the need arose. the son was only 10 years old, but already showed great promise.one autumn day mateo set out early with his wife to go and inspect one of his flocks in a clearing within the maquis. little fortunato wanted to go with him, but the clearing was too far away; and besides, someone had to stay behind to look after the house; so his father refused his request to accompany them. as we shall see, he had cause to regret his decision. he had been away for several hours, and little fortunato was lying quietly in the sun, gazing at the blue mountains and thinking about the following sunday, when he would be going to have lunch in town with his uncle the caporal when his meditations were suddenly interrupted by the sound of a gunshot. he got up and looked towards the plain, whence the sound had come. other gunshots followed at irregular intervals, coming closer all the time. finally, on the path leading from the plain to mateo's house, there appeared a man in a pointed cap of the sort worn by the mountain folk, bearded, in rags, and dragging himself along with great difficulty, leaning on his gun. he had just been shot in the thigh.this man was an outlaw who had gone by night to buy gunpowder in the town and had been ambushed on the way by corsican voltigeurs. after putting up a tremendous defence he had managed to get away, hotly pursued and taking shots at his pursuers from behind rocks. but the soldiers were close behind him, and his wound meant that it would be impossible for him to reach safety of the maquis before they caught up with him.he came up to fortunato and said to him:"are you mateo falcone's son?""yes.""i am gianetto sanpiero. the yellow-collars are after me. hide me, i can't go any further.""but what will my father say if i hide you without his permission?""he will say you did the right thing.""how can i be sure?""hide me quickly, they're coming.""wait till my father comes back.""wait? damn it, they'll be here in five minutes! come on, hide me, or i'll kill you."with perfect composure, fortunato replied, "your gun isn't loaded, and there are no cartridges left in your carchera.""i've still got my stiletto.""but can you run as fast as me?" with a bound, he was out of reach."you are no son of mateo falcone! would you have me arrested by the yellow-collars on your very doorstep?"the child seemed agitated. "what will you give me if i hide you?" he asked, drawing closer. the bandit rummaged through his carchera, and took from it a five-franc piece, which he had no doubt set aside for buying gunpowder. fortunato smiled at the sight of the silver coin. he seized it and said to gianetto, "have no fear."at once he made a large hole in a pile of hay which stood beside the house. gianetto hid in it, and the child covered him over so as to allow him to breathe, yet so that no one would suspect that there was a man concealed there. he also thought of a most ingenious strategy, worthy of a true renegade. he went and fetched a cat and her kittens and placed them on the pile of hay, to make it look as if it had not been disturbed recently. then, noticing drops of blood on the path near the house, he carefully covered them with dust, after which he went and lay down again quite calmly in the sun.a few minutes later six men in brown uniforms with yellow collars, led by a high-ranking officer, arrived at mateo's door. the adjutant was a distant relative of falcone. (it is a well-known fact that in corsica degrees of kinship are traced much further back than is the case elsewhere.) his name was tiodoro gamba. he was a zealous man, much feared by the bandits, several of whom he had already tracked down."good day, little cousin," he said to fortunato, accosting him. "how tall you've grown! did you see a man pass this way just now?""oh, i'm not as tall as you yet, cousin," the child replied with seeming naivety."you soon will be. tell me now, did you see a man pass by?""did i see a man pass by?""yes, a man wearing a pointed black-velvet hat and a jacket with red and yellow embroidery.""a man with a pointed hat and a jacket with red and yellow embroidery?""yes. answer me quickly. and stop repeating my questions.""this morning the priest came past our house on his horse-piero. he asked me how papa was, and i told him that ...""ah, you're trying to be clever, you little devil! tell me quickly which way gianetto went. he's the man we're after, and i'm certain he took this path.""who knows?""who knows? i do! i know you saw him.""how can i have seen someone pass by, if i was asleep?""you weren't asleep, you little wippersnapper. the shots woke you.""what makes you think your guns are so noisy, cousin? my father's is much louder.""to the devil with you, you confounded little scamp! i'm quite certain you saw gianetto. you may even have hidden him. come on, lads! into the house with you, and see whether our man is inside. he was hobbling along on one leg, and the wretch has got too much sense to try to make it to the maquis in that state. anyway, the bloodstains end right here.""and what will papa say?" asked fortunato with a mocking laugh. "what will he say when he hears that someone entered his house while he was out?""you little rogue!" said adjutant gamba, taking him by the ear. "i can soon make you change your tune, you know! if i give you twenty strokes with the flat of my sabre, perhaps then you'll talk."and fortunato still laughed contemptuously. "my father is mateo falcone!" he said with emphasis."do you realize, you little devil, that i can take you away to corte or bastia? i'll make you sleep in a cell, on straw. i'll clap you in leg-irons and have you guillotined if you don't tell me where gianetto sanpiero is."the child burst out laughing at this ridiculous threat. "my father is mateo falcone!" he repeated."sir," muttered one of the soldiers while touching the officer's sleeve, "don't let's get on the wrong side of mateo."gamba was plainly in a quandary. he spoke in a low voice to his soldiers, who had already searched the whole house. this was not a very lengthy operation, for a corsican's cottage consists of one single square room. the furnishings consist of a table, benches, chests, hunting equipment, and a few household utensils. meanwhile, little fortunato stroked his cat, and seemed to take a malicious delight in the perplexity of the soldiers and his cousin. a soldier went up to the pile of hay. seeing the cat, he gave the hay a half-hearted prod with his bayonet, shrugging his shoulders as if sensing that his precaution was absurd. nothing stirred; the child's face betrayed not the slightest emotion.the adjutant and his men were at their wits' end. already they were looking gravely in the direction of the plain, as if tempted to head back the way they had come, when their chief, realizing that threats would make no impression on falcone's son, decided to make one last attempt, and see what effect cajolery and bribes would have."little cousin," he said. "you seem a wide-awake lad; you'll go far. but you're 'messing' with me, and if i weren't afraid of angering my cousin mateo, i'm hanged if i wouldn't take you prisoner.""you don't say!""but when my cousin gets back, i'll tell him the whole story, and he'll give you a thrashing as a reward for having lied.""is that so?""you'll see. look, be a good kid, and i'll give you something.""and i'll give you a piece of advice, cousin. if you waste any more time, gianetto will be in the maquis, and then it'll take more than one fine fellow like you to fetch him out again." the adjutant took from his pocket a silver watch that was worth at least ten crowns, and, seeing little fortunato's eyes light up at the sight of it, he held the watch suspended from its steel chain and said, "you little rogue. wouldn't you like to have a watch like this hanging around your neck? you could stroll around the streets of porto-vecchio, proud as a peacock, and people would ask you what time it was, and you'd say, "look at my watch.""when i'm grown up, my uncle the caporal will give me a watch.""yes; but your uncle's son has got one already-but not as nice as this one-and he's younger than you."the child sighed."well, do you want this watch, little cousin?" he said swinging it gently in his direction. fortunato eyed the watch like a cat that has had a whole chicken placed before it. sensing it is being teased, it dare not lay a paw on it, and from time to time it looks away, so as not to succumb to temptation nor appear too interested. but it licks its chops continually, and seems to be saying to its tormentor, "what a cruel trick to play on me!"yet adjutant gamba seemed to be sincere in his offer of the watch. fortunato did not reach out his hand, but, smiling bitterly, said to him, "what are you trying to put over?""i swear i'm not. just tell me where gianetto is and the watch is yours."fortunato could not suppress a smile of disbelief; fixing his dark eyes on those of the adjutant, he tried to read in them how much faith he could place in his words."may i lose my commission," exclaimed the adjutant, "if i don't give you the watch as agreed. my men here are witnesses, and i cannot go back on my word as an officer."as he spoke he moved the watch closer and closer until it was almost touching fortunato's pale cheek. the child's face clearly showed the struggle between personal greed and the traditional claims of solidarity against the authorities that was raging within him. his bare chest was heaving, and he seemed to be fighting for breath. and still the watch swung, twisted, and occasionally bumped against the tip of his nose. at last his right hand slowly rose towards the watch; his fingertips touched it; and he felt its full weight in his palm, though the adjutant still held the end of the chain. the dial was pale blue, the case newly polished; in the sunshine it seemed ablaze...the temptation was too great.fortunato raised his left hand too, and, with his thumb, pointed over his shoulder at the pile of hay behind him. the adjutant understood-he let go of the chain; fortunato found himself sole possessor of the watch. he rose with the agility of a fawn and moved ten paces away from the pile of hay, which the soldiers at once began to demolish.very soon the hay began to move and a man emerged from it, drenched in blood and with a dagger in his hand. but as he tried to rise to his feet, his wound which had stopped bleeding, prevented him from standing up-he fell. throwing himself on him, gamba ripped the stiletto from his grip. instantly he was tightly bound, despite his struggles.gianetto, lying on the ground trussed like a bundle of firewood, turned his head towards fortunato, who had stepped forward again. "you son of a... ," he said with more contempt than anger. the child flipped back the silver coin he had accepted from the prisoner, feeling that he no longer deserved it; but the outlaw seemed not to even notice the gesture. with great composure he said to the adjutant, "my dear gamba, i can't walk; you're going to have to carry me into town.""you were running faster than a fleeing buck a moment ago," retorted the victor pitilessly. "but set your mind at rest; i'm so pleased to have caught you that i could carry you on my back for three miles without tiring. in any case, my friend, we'll make you a stretcher out of some branches and your overcoat, and we can get horses at crespoli's farm.""that's good," said the prisoner, "and just put a bit of straw on the litter, so i'll be more comfortable."while the soldiers were busy improvising a litter with chestnut branches and dressing gianetto's wound, mateo falcone and his wife suddenly rounded the bend leading from the maquis. the woman was plodding laboriously forward, bent beneath the weight of an enormous sack of chestnuts, while her husband ambled along with only a rifle in his hand, and another slung over his shoulder-it is unbecoming for a man to carry any burden but his weapons.mateo's first thought on seeing the soldiers was that they had come to arrest him. but why should such an idea cross his mind? had mateo perhaps tangled with the law? no; he enjoyed a good reputation. he was, as they say, a man of high standing. but he was a corsican and a man of the mountains, and there are few corsicans from the mountains who, if they delve in their memories, cannot find some offense-a gunshot, a knifing, or some such trifling matter. mateo had a clearer conscience than most, for it was more than ten years since he had pointed his gun at any man. but nevertheless he was circumspect, and he prepared mentally to defend himself vigorously should the need arise."woman," he said to giuseppa, "put down your sack and be ready." she instantly obeyed. he handed her the gun that was slung over his shoulder, which might get in the way. he loaded the one he was carrying and advanced circumspectly towards the house, keeping close to the trees at the roadside, and ready, at the slightest hint of hostility, to dash behind the largest trunk, where he could fire from under cover. his wife walked at his heels, carrying his spare gun and his cartridge-pouch. in the event of combat it is the task of a good wife to load her husband's weapon.the adjutant, for his part, felt extremely ill at ease at the sight of mateo advancing with measured steps, gun at the ready and finger on the trigger. "if by any chance," he thought, "mateo should turn out to be a relative of gianetto, or if he were a friend of his and meant to protect him, the very wads from his two guns would hit two of us, as sure as a letter reaches its destination. and if he were to take aim at me, notwithstanding our kinship..."in this dilemma, he took the courageous course of advancing alone to meet mateo and tell him of the affair, hailing him like a long-lost friend. but the short distance that separated him from mateo seemed interminable."hey there, old comrade!" he called. "how are things, my old friend? it's me, your cousin gamba."mateo had halted with no word of reply, and as the other spoke he slowly raised the barrel of his gun until, at the moment when the adjutant reached him, it was pointing towards the sky. "buon giorno, fratllo" ("good day, brother," the traditional greeting between corsicans), said the adjutant, offering him his hand. "i haven't seen you in ages.""buon giorno, fratello," answered mateo much to the officer's relief."as i was passing, i came to say hello to you and cousin pepa. we've had a long haul today, but, although we're exhausted, there's no call to feel sorry for us, for we've made a splendid catch. we've just collared gianetto sanpiero.""god be praised!" exclaimed giuseppa. "he stole a milk goat from us only last week."these words delighted gamba."poor devil," said mateo. "he was hungry.""the rogue defended himself like a lion," continued the adjutant, somewhat disconcerted that mateo felt for him. "he killed one of my men and, not content with that, he broke corporal chardon's arm. not that that matters-chardon's only a frenchman. and then he went and hid so well that the devil himself wouldn't have discovered him. if it hadn't been for my little cousin fortunato here i'd never have been able to find him.""fortunato?" exclaimed mateo."fortunato?" repeated giuseppa."yes. gianetto had hidden under that pile of hay over there. but my little cousin showed me what the game was. i'll tell his uncle the caporal, so he can send him a fine present for his trouble. and both your names will appear in the report i shall be sending to the public prosecutor.""damnation!" muttered mateo softly.they had rejoined the squad of soldiers. gianetto had already been placed on the litter, ready for departure. when he saw mateo in the company of gamba, he smiled scornfully. then, turning towards the door of the house, he spat on the threshold and said, "house of a traitor!"only a man resigned to death would have dared call falcone a traitor. one quick dagger-thrust would instantly have repaid him for the insult once and for all. yet mateo merely raised his hand to his brow like a man in despair.fortunato had gone inside the house on seeing his father arrive. he soon reappeared with a bowl of milk, which he offered to the prisoner with downcast eyes."keep away from me!" roared the outlaw, in a voice of thunder. then, turning to one of the voltigeurs, he said to him, "give me a drink, comrade."the soldier handed him his water-bottle, and the bandit drank the water offered to him by a man with whom he had just exchanged rifle shots. then he asked to have his hands tied across his chest instead of behind his back. "i like to lie comfortably," he explained.they hastened to comply with his request. then the adjutant gave the signal to depart, bade farewell to mateo, who did not reply, and set off back towards the plains at a brisk march. almost ten minutes passed before mateo spoke a word. the child glanced uneasily first at his mother, then at his father, who was leaning on his gun, contemplating him with an expression of concentrated fury."a fine beginning!" said mateo at last, in a voice that was too calm-one terrifying to anyone who knew the man."father!" cried the child, advancing with tears in his eyes as if to throw himself at his feet. but mateo shouted, "out of my sight!" and the child stopped and stood sobbing a few paces from his father.giuseppa stepped forward. she had just noticed the watch-chain, one end of which was dangling from fortunato's shirt."who gave you that watch?" she asked severely."my cousin the adjutant."falcone seized the watch and hurled it against a rock, smashing it into a thousand pieces."woman," he said, "is this child mine?"giuseppa's brown cheeks turned brick-red, "what are you saying, mateo? -do you realize who you are talking to?""this child is the first of his line to have committed a betrayal."fortunato's sobs and hiccoughs intensified-falcone continued to stare at him like a wildcat. finally he struck the ground with the butt of his gun, then shouldered it and set off again on the path leading to the maquis, calling on fortunato to follow him. the child obeyed. giuseppa ran after mateo and seized him by the arm."he is your son," she said in a trembling voice, fixing her dark eyes on those of her husband as if trying to read his thoughts."leave me alone," replied mateo, "i am his father."giuseppa kissed her son and retreated, weeping, into the cottage. she fell to her knees before an image of the virgin and prayed fervently. meanwhile, falcone walked a couple of hundred paces along the path and did not stop until he reached a small ravine, into which he descended. he sounded the earth with the butt of his gun and found it soft. easy to dig-the place seemed suitable."fortunato, go and stand by that big stone," he said without emotion.the child did as he was ordered."kneel down and say your prayers.""father! don't kill me, father!""say your prayers!" repeated mateo in a terrible voice.stammering and sobbing, the child recited the our father and the apostles' creed. at the end of each prayer his father uttered a loud "amen!""are those all the prayers you know?""father, i know the hail mary too, and the rosary-aunt taught me.""it's rather long, but no matter."the child finished the litany in a whisper."have you finished?""oh, father, mercy! forgive me! i won't do it again! i'll beg my uncle the caporal until gianetto is reprieved!"he went on speaking. mateo had raised his gun and was taking aim, saying to his son, "may god forgive you!" the child made a desperate effort to get up and clasp his father by the knees, but he was too late. mateo fired, and fortunato fell like a rock-dead.without a glance at the corpse, mateo set off for the house to fetch a spade with which to bury his son. he had gone only a few paces when he met giuseppa, who had run up in alarm on hearing the rifle-shot."what have you done?" she cried."justice.""where is he?""in the ravine; i'm going to bury him. he died like a christian; i shall have a mass sung for him. tell my son-in-law, tiodoro bianchi, to come and live with us."the long june twilight faded into night. dublin lay enveloped in darkness but for the dim light of the moon that shone through fleecy clouds, casting a pale light as of approaching dawn over the streets and the dark waters of the liffey. around the beleaguered four courts the heavy guns roared. here and there through the city, machine guns and rifles broke the silence of the night, spasmodically, like dogs barking on lone farms.  republicans and free staters were waging civil war.on a rooftop near o'connell bridge, a republican sniper lay watching. beside him lay his rifle and over his shoulders was slung a pair of field glasses. his face was the face of a student, thin and ascetic, but his eyes had the cold gleam of the fanatic. they were deep and thoughtful, the eyes of a man who is used to looking at death.he was eating a sandwich hungrily. he had eaten nothing since morning. he had been too excited to eat. he finished the sandwich, and, taking a flask of whiskey from his pocket, he took a short drought. then he returned the flask to his pocket. he paused for a moment, considering whether he should risk a smoke.  it was dangerous. the flash might be seen in the darkness, and there were enemies watching. he decided to take the risk.placing a cigarette between his lips, he struck a match, inhaled the smoke hurriedly and put out the light. almost immediately, a bullet flattened itself against the parapet of the roof. the sniper took another whiff and put out the cigarette. then he swore softly and crawled away to the left.cautiously he raised himself and peered over the parapet. there was a flash and a bullet whizzed over his head. he dropped immediately. he had seen the flash. it came from the opposite side of the street.he rolled over the roof to a chimney stack in the rear, and slowly drew himself up behind it, until his eyes were level with the top of the parapet. there was nothing to be seen--just the dim outline of the opposite housetop against the blue sky. his enemy was under cover.just then an armored car came across the bridge and advanced slowly up the street. it stopped on the opposite side of the street, fifty yards ahead.  the sniper could hear the dull panting of the motor. his heart beat faster. it was an enemy car. he wanted to fire, but he knew it was useless. his bullets would never pierce the steel that covered the gray monster.then round the corner of a side street came an old woman, her head covered by a tattered shawl. she began to talk to the man in the turret of the car. she was pointing to the roof where the sniper lay. an informer.the turret opened. a man's head and shoulders appeared, looking toward the sniper. the sniper raised his rifle and fired. the head fell heavily on the turret wall. the woman darted toward the side street. the sniper fired again.  the woman whirled round and fell with a shriek into the gutter.suddenly from the opposite roof a shot rang out and the sniper dropped his rifle with a curse. the rifle clattered to the roof.  the sniper thought the noise would wake the dead. he stooped to pick the rifle up. he couldn't lift it. his forearm was dead. "i'm hit," he muttered.dropping flat onto the roof, he crawled back to the parapet.  with his left hand he felt the injured right forearm. the blood was oozing through the sleeve of his coat. there was no pain--just a deadened sensation, as if the arm had been cut off.quickly he drew his knife from his pocket, opened it on the breastwork of the parapet, and ripped open the sleeve. there was a small hole where the bullet had entered.  on the other side there was no hole. the bullet had lodged in the bone. it must have fractured it. he bent the arm below the wound. the arm bent back easily. he ground his teeth to overcome the pain.then taking out his field dressing, he ripped open the packet with his knife. he broke the neck of the iodine bottle and let the bitter fluid drip into the wound. a paroxysm of pain swept through him. he placed the cotton wadding over the wound and wrapped the dressing over it. he tied the ends with his teeth.then he lay still against the parapet, and, closing his eyes, he made an effort of will to overcome the pain.in the street beneath all was still. the armored car had retired speedily over the bridge, with the machine gunner's head hanging lifeless over the turret. the woman's corpse lay still in the gutter.the sniper lay still for a long time nursing his wounded arm and planning escape. morning must not find him wounded on the roof.  the enemy on the opposite roof coverd his escape. he must kill that enemy and he could not use his rifle. he had only a revolver to do it. then he thought of a plan.taking off his cap, he placed it over the muzzle of his rifle.  then he pushed the rifle slowly upward over the parapet, until the cap was visible from the opposite side of the street.  almost immediately there was a report, and a bullet pierced the center of the cap. the sniper slanted the rifle forward. the cap clipped down into the street. then catching the rifle in the middle, the sniper dropped his left hand over the roof and let it hang, lifelessly. after a few moments he let the rifle drop to the street. then he sank to the roof, dragging his hand with him.crawling quickly to his feet, he peered up at the corner of the roof. his ruse had succeeded. the other sniper, seeing the cap and rifle fall, thought that he had killed his man. he was now standing before a row of chimney pots, looking across, with his head clearly silhouetted against the western sky.the republican sniper smiled and lifted his revolver above the edge of the parapet. the distance was about fifty yards--a hard shot in the dim light, and his right arm was paining him like a thousand devils. he took a steady aim. his hand trembled with eagerness. pressing his lips together, he took a deep breath through his nostrils and fired. he was almost deafened with the report and his arm shook with the recoil.then when the smoke cleared, he peered across and uttered a cry of joy. his enemy had been hit. he was reeling over the parapet in his death agony. he struggled to keep his feet, but he was slowly falling forward as if in a dream. the rifle fell from his grasp, hit the parapet, fell over, bounded off the pole of a barber's shop beneath and then clattered on the pavement.then the dying man on the roof crumpled up and fell forward. the body turned over and over in space and hit the ground with a dull thud. then it lay still.the sniper looked at his enemy falling and he shuddered. the lust of battle died in him. he became bitten by remorse. the sweat stood out in beads on his forehead. weakened by his wound and the long summer day of fasting and watching on the roof, he revolted from the sight of the shattered mass of his dead enemy.  his teeth chattered, he began to gibber to himself, cursing the war, cursing himself, cursing everybody.he looked at the smoking revolver in his hand, and with an oath he hurled it to the roof at his feet. the revolver went off with a concussion and the bullet whizzed past the sniper's head. he was frightened back to his senses by the shock. his nerves steadied. the cloud of fear scattered from his mind and he laughed.taking the whiskey flask from his pocket, he emptied it a drought. he felt reckless under the influence of the spirit. he decided to leave the roof now and look for his company commander, to report. everywhere around was quiet. there was not much danger in going through the streets. he picked up his revolver and put it in his pocket. then he crawled down through the skylight to the house underneath.when the sniper reached the laneway on the street level, he felt a sudden curiosity as to the identity of the enemy sniper whom he had killed. he decided that he was a good shot, whoever he was.  he wondered did he know him.  perhaps he had been in his own company before the split in the army. he decided to risk going over to have a look at him. he peered around the corner into o'connell street. in the upper part of the street there was heavy firing, but around here all was quiet.the sniper darted across the street. a machine gun tore up the ground around him with a hail of bullets, but he escaped. he threw himself face downward beside the corpse. the machine gun stopped.then the sniper turned over the dead body and looked into his brother's face.violent death was no novelty to sgt. james peyton. he had seen far worse than a brunette with a bruise on her forehead and a slit throat.he felt as if he had just touched a live wire.he wide-eyed the older detective. "dad--"lt. lawrence peyton raised a cautionary hand."please, jimmy." his voice dropped. "i wish i'd never told you about him.""but the mo--""sh. the husband hears you, spreads the rumor he's backâ. " he glanced at the bedroom door as if he expected something to enter and devour them.lucy welch's long hair spread out like a nun's veil on the gray carpet beneath her. her brown eyes stared up at jimmy.she wore a red tube top and tight, black designer jeans. how perfectly, colorwise, her top and lipstick coordinated with her throat.jimmy hoped his necrophilic fantasies weren't too obvious. he must mention that to dr. larsen tomorrow.jimmy peyton was a fat little boy in a blond, blue-eyed hunk disguise. he had fooled many women, since he always took off before the disguise slipped.lieutenant peyton surveyed the huge, decadently ornate bedroom. he was a great, bloated version of his son with a cloud-gray crew cut. "judging by that crap on the dressing table, she liked spending money.""or knew how to get some guy to spend it for her."lieutenant peyton winked approvingly, which gave jimmy a glow, then turned his attention to the bed. "black silk sheets. now, what does that tell you?""i don't think you should jump to conclusions, dad.""you want to get to my rank, you'd better."the glow faded.* * *the welch living room was expensively furnished, spotlessly clean, and coldly neat. jimmy couldn't wait to leave it.george welch had a thin, vinegary face and rust-colored hair, parted down the middle."i understand," said lieutenant peyton, "you were divorced?""separated," said welch as if he were about to have the lieutenant beheaded. "we were happily married; but we were having difficulties, so we decided to spend some time apart.""i see. so what happened tonight?""we were supposed to go to dinner and that play at the birmingham theater. i came by to get her; and i found her like that."jimmy noted welch's granite formality. indifference to his wife's death? shock? or something else?"did you," asked lieutenant peyton, "notice anything unusual as you pulled up?"welch hesitated. "no.""sure?""i'm sure.""okay. now, did your wife have any enemies?""yes." like he was a cat and the question was a nice, juicy mouse. "she recently became friendly--just friendly--with a man named eric dimke. according to lucy, he was used to getting his way with women; and when she turned him down, he didn't take it well.""what did he do?""she wouldn't tell me. but i got the impression she was scared of him.""you know where this guy lives?"he gave them an address in flat rock."think he's telling the truth?" asked jimmy back in the car."not completely. maybe not at all. not about that trial separation; that's for sure. once she got her hands on his money and that house, that little bitch was through with him."and all you need to jump to conclusions about that is eyes."the address was in a sparsely populated area.they turned into a driveway, the headlights revealing a bedraggled oldsmobile parked so close to the road they almost rear-ended it.they crossed what felt to jimmy's ankles like a balding, unmowed lawn.lieutenant peyton sidestepped something. "look out for this junk." a lone streetlamp and the light from the house dimly illuminating scattered auto innards."i don't believe it," said jimmy."believe what?""that a woman as well off as her would take up with anyone who lived here.""now who's jumping to conclusions?"* * *the big, black leather reclining chair was the only piece of furniture in that room that did not need reupholstering, distinctive in a room whose walls bore cheap prints of flowers, gleaming on an unshampooed rug; and as anyone who had known him ten minutes might have expected, eric dimke occupied it.he was a great bronzed ape with a creamy white elvis pompadour. as he leaned back, his unbuttoned shirt spread open, displaying his pectorals.only jimmy seemed to notice the woman. she viewed the proceedings as she had greeted the peytons at the door: with dumb animal indifference through which muted anger only occasionally flickered. blotches marred otherwise satisfactory features.lieutenant peyton repeated welch's accusations."he's full of it.""did you know mrs. welch?" asked the lieutenant."sure i knew her. lotsa guys knew her. she was hangin' around the flat top bar--i dunno, five, six weeks before i got talkie' to her.""what would a woman from indian village be doing in a bar around here?"dimke shrugged. "i wouldn't go to no bars in detroit after dark. i got the idea she went to bars all over the place. i mean, she was lookin' for action. or maybe she just didn't want to go to no bars around where she lived 'cause she thought her old man might catch her.""she was afraid of him?""i think she was. i got the idea he was this wimp she'd just married for his money; and i asked her why she didn't leave him; and she said, 'that's something i'd rather not go into'; and she got this funny look in her eyes. know what i mean?""yeah. you got to know mrs. welch quite well, didn't you?"dimke's face went cold. "like what do you mean?""well, she told you about her marriage. she told you about other bars she went to. welch knew your name and address, which kind of suggests she did too. i mean, you can't blame us for--uh- jumping to conclusions."jimmy flinched.another shrug. "so i let her talk to me. so i let her think i was comin' on to her." he and lieutenant peyton studied each other. "so maybe i was. hey, i been married--what?--twelve years? i used to be real big with the ladies. so i let some fine-lookin' chick make some moves on me, show me i still got it. even the most happily married man's gotta do that or he gets stale. right, hoe?""i guess so."they were precinct bound."what do you think of his story?" asked jimmy."story's fine. but did you notice mrs. dimke's wrists?" jimmy vaguely recalled bruises."and the way she acted?""she acted bored.""she acted scared. she was scared to let us see how scared she was, so she held herself in. there's plenty she could tell us, but she knows what he'll do to her if she does.""so it's between welch and dimke?""one thing's sure: it wasn't him.""him?"lieutenant peyton grinned. "you know."the lieutenant flipped on his office light. "the bloodstains show she was killed in the bedroom. and there was no sign of a struggle, so it was evidently someone she trusted." he started going through the mail on his desk. "i mean, can you see anyone letting him get that close--and in her bedroom yet?"he glanced at one of the envelopes, started moving it to the bottom, then glanced at it again.his face went blank."what's wrong, dad?"the old man struggled to smile. "now, you got me doing it. where's the letter opener?" he went through his top drawer, then the second drawers on each side, then the next, growing more frantic with each drawer. "where the hell is the damn letter opener?""dad." he grabbed the envelope and ripped off an edge.lieutenant peyton snatched it back, clawed out the paper inside, shook it open, and read it.he offered it to his son with a trembling hand, looking as if he were going to vomit.the hand-printed words flew up like fists: "lucy welch was my return performance. mephistopheles."jimmy foggily heard his father: "first good hunch you had since you got promoted out of uniform; and it had to be about him."the bar was on the first level of the renaissance center. it was a slow night. the bartender and all but two of the patrons were engrossed in a televised tigers game.the peytons sat, hunched over drinks, in the dim red glow, remembering seven years ago. . . .lieutenant peyton recalled a young blonde, nude on a morgue slab. her face was like the wholesome farm girls on the cover of his folks' american magazines, except for the lump on her head and the gash across her throat.an officer read from a notebook: "her name was helen dunn. twenty-three years old. she was a barmaid." he named a bar near wayne state university. "her boss was emptying out some trash, right after opening up, when he found her body behind some cans.""had there been any trouble recently?""nothing in particular; but you know how barmaids are.""yeah." he replaced the sheet, wondering how to say what he had to say without revealing too much. he decided it was impossible. "i want this to have top priority. i want to know who works there, who drinks there--everything.""something special about this, sir?""maybe i just don't like to see twenty-three-year-old girls die."he was not fooling the officer. he did not care.the "something special" was a printed note now in his desk drawer: "helen dunn begins her beauty sleep tonight. it's going to be a long one. mephistopheles. . . ."anyone can write a note, blame a personal killing on a fictional psychopath. the police investigated the murder with more than usual diligence, but spread no alarms.peyton dismissed the note as a blind a week and a half later, but spent the next two months going through his mail on the brink of cardiac arrest.he had just stopped fearing postal deliveries when the second note arrived: "i'm afraid tracy huggins won't have much time for studying from now on. but that doesn't matter. she's never going to graduate. mephistopheles."he shut off his feelings and scoured the day's reports, then called every huggins in the phone book.he went home with no idea who tracy huggins was. . . .the next morning, during coffee, someone tapped him on the shoulder.it was another detective. "weren't you the one who was looking for tracy huggins?""yes.""her folks just reported her missing. she hasn't been seen since leaving a late class at wayne two nights ago."six days later, a deputy sheriff on horseback found her behind some bushes in hines park. . . .wayne state was on its guard. patrols, curfews, inspection of credentials, hot lines to a special task force--there was no way this character could strike again.as long as he confined himself to wsu.one april night, debra meredith, twenty-four, divorced, went to a singles bar in farmington. she left, according to witnesses, about twelve-fifteen.she was found the next morning in the driver's seat of her car in an oak park shopping center. this time, the note was on her lap: "debra meredith was looking for action. she found it. mephistopheles."the investigation was soon statewide; but there were few leads, all false, by that early morning in june when a priest at the university of windsor found julie mckinnon, of toronto, in some bushes.the windsor police received a note the next day: "julie mckinnon felt so safe on this side of the water. now she feels so sorry. mephistopheles. . . ."that was the end of it.until now.* * *the whitewashed walls of dr. whitney larsen's office were decorated with framed degrees, including a ph.d.; professional-looking photographs, taken by the doctor himself, of breathtaking landscapes "i won't shoot anything warmblooded, even with a camera"; and numerous paintings, portraits and abstracts and everything in between, of dogs "i like dogs. my dogs have lasted longer, and pleased me more, than all my marriages".dr. larsen's build resulted from another hobby: fine food. he was not fat yet; but it was a distinct possibility. he was a tall man with black, curly, thinning hair. his hazel eyes studied jimmy peyton, who haltingly detailed his fantasies about lucy welch.the doctor realized he was expected to say something profound. "was she good-looking--uh, as corpses go, that is?""mrs. welch had been an attractive woman in her lifetime."larsen chuckled. "could it be, if you'd jumped her bones, that really would've shown daddy?""i don't know."conversation stopped. jimmy studied the plaques and pictures while dr. larsen studied him."jimmy," said the doctor finally, "i get the feeling you're not all here with me. like there's something really bugging you; and all this stuff about having the hots for a corpse is just your way of sidestepping it."he did not prod. he had learned the reluctant revelations were often the most significant, and that no patient was obliged to make them."when we got back to headquarters, there was this envelope on my father's desk. . . .""so now," said dr. larsen, "he's back; and you're going to deliver him to daddy as a father's day present--" he glanced at his 1984 calendar--"two months late.""not exactly.""then, what exactly?'jimmy laid a folded piece of paper on the desk. "this is the note."dr. larsen's face soured. "anyone ever tell you you watch too much television?" he read the note, his expression grim, then became haughty. "ziss fellow iss obviously overzexed; but zen, aren't ve all? ven he vas a kinder, hiss mama locked him in ze closet ven she caught him veering her undervear--hoo-ha!--undt ven he vas in dere, he seen papa t'rough da keyhole makin' nice-nice mit a floozie." jimmy's expression was granite. "seriously, if you don't already know as much as i could tell you about this guy--maybe, if you don't know even more--i'd be worried about your future as a cop.""think he wants to get caught?""hell, no. anymore than you want to break your neck when you go on one of those super coasters at cedar point. i mean, besides hating women--which, i hope to god, you've already figured out--he likes excitement.""but why did he stop for seven years, then go back to it?""one sure way to find out.""what?""have him make an appointment with me."judy franklin was lucy welch's sister. lieutenant peyton could see a resemblance muddied by drink and fat. her brown, boy-length hair was flecked with gray. her face was cosmetically embalmed.she had a georgia accent. "that wimp she married didn't kill her, that boyfriend did.""we have them under observation, ma'am.""you should have their rear ends in jail.""why?" her body tightened with rage. "i mean, what makes you suspect them?"he took his notebook from a drawer, placed it open on the desk, and poised a pen over it.she relaxed a little. "i only met welch once, back in 1977, when lucy brought him home for a fourth of july picnic. they weren't married yet, think she just met him. didn't like him then. every time i turned around, he was hangin' around her; or he wasn't far away, watchin' her."and the way he watched her. i been in enough bars to know when a man watches you that way, you don't want no part of him."couldn't understand what she seen in him till i found out he had money." some of his feeling about that must have shown in his face. "well, you didn't have to live on what was left of your daddy's paycheck from his ladies and his drinking.""so you met him only once; and you're basing a murder accusation on that?""that and the letters she sent me. he was just like i thought he was--jealous and clingy and all-around weird.""do you have any of these letters?""not now i don't. i threw 'em out a long time ago."aren't you the sentimental bitch? "so all you have against welch is hearsay? what about dimke?"she tensed again. "i suppose you'd say that was hearsay too, specially since she never said nothin' right out. but a sister knows. you just go out there--he lives out in flat rock--and take a look at that wife of his. he coulda done that to her, he coulda done this to lucy.""good point." he thought it best not to mention having already done so and coming to the same conclusion, or seeking someone much deadlier than welch or dimke.or that he was now drawing an unflattering caricature of the mayor of detroit.lieutenant peyton was obviously uneasy the next few days. he finally told jimmy why over lunch. "remember the last time i was after this guy; and i came in one night, real nervous, and glanced over my shoulder like i thought someone was following me; and you and your mother wanted to know why?"jimmy searched his memory, then shook his head. "but now that you mention it, was someone following you?""maybe. i don't know. that was after tracy huggins disappeared. her folks came to headquarters, raised hell. said i should've told the papers about that first note. then, they would've known. then, they could've done something. stuff like that."heard they hung around the rest of the day, still pretty steamed up. made me kind of paranoid.""what did they do when her body was found?""i got a phone call the next day. they just said, 'satisfied?' then hung up. i could tell it was huggins.""dad?""yes?""did she bring it all back?" the old man's brows twitched. "i've seen her in the halls."he was referring to judy franklin.jimmy brought dr. larsen up to date. from judy franklin's mouth to the doctor's ear, the story was naturally mangled. but one point survived. and finally someone saw its significance."she won't leave us alone," said jimmy. "she won't let us do our job.""well," said dr. larsen, "she gave you information that, on the face of it, was worth checking out; and as far as she can see, you didn't; and you won't explain why.""the commissioner wants to keep a lid on it. he thinks this guy might be a copycat. says he never heard of a psychopath starting up again, years later, in the same area.""tell the commissioner for me that, if psychos obeyed rules, they wouldn't be psychos. unless he had reasons he didn't want to talk about.""what do you mean?""nothing. the point is you don't seem to be satisfied with knowing you're doing the best you can. the victim's sister's got to see it. i mean, if you desperately need to have everybody approve of you, how the hell are you ever going to arrest anybody?" he glanced at his watch. "which might be a good thing to think about until next week."jimmy counted out dr. larsen's fee. "i guess mephistopheles has become kind of our obsession.""then, my bet's on him.""why?""obsessed people can't think straight. try some relaxation when you get to your desk in the morning."jimmy hesitated as he laid a five-dollar bill on the pile. "i noticed you became thoughtful when i told you what she said, like something'd occurred to you.""you'll never give up trying to turn me into a consultant.""did something occur to you?""okay. if i tell you, will you remember it was your idea?""sure. ""and this is the last time you ask me for advice?""agreed. ""then here it is. . . ."jimmy went looking for a certain book of photographs, which he found after two difficult days.that night, he took the book to a certain bar. helen dunn's boss scanned the page in which jimmy was interested and, without prompting, singled out the right man. "this guy. i know i seen him hangin' around here, botherin' helen, not long before it happened." he scanned the rest of the page. "i recognize some of these other people too; but if you're lookin' for someone who was botherin' her--this guy."the rest were dead ends.the hugginses slammed the door at the mention of his name.the owner of the singles bar stared at him. "seven years ago! i can't even remember who the hell was here last night."julie mckinnon's acquaintances were far away by now.he was wasting time.time enough for patti bukowski to leave her east detroit home and her husband of three years, gil, because things were getting too crazy. time enough for her to move to a downtown detroit apartment building to experience being answerable to no one.she spent the first evening in hart plaza on the great, terraced stone structure that overlooked the darkness of the detroit river.she was too absorbed in the solitude and the glow of the windsor skyline at sunset to notice him until he sat beside her.patti gave up two and a half weeks later, only partly because she missed gil.she was afraid of a man who had seemed so nice at hart plaza.gil had suggested she wait until tomorrow; but what could be the harm of going home tonight?"patti."she turned, feeling as if she had just stepped off a thousand-foot cliff. "oh. hi.""where are you going?""i don't think that's any of your business.""you're going back to him, aren't you?"she looked for her car key. if she ignored him, he would most likely get the hint.she did not see him reach into his pocket, take out a small chain, welded to a sinker and two slugs, and raise it over his head."patti," he cooed."what!""hold it right there." a figure emerged from the shadows, waving a gun at the man. "up against the car and spread the feet."jimmy peyton showed her his credentials, read the suspect his rights, and patted him down. he found a switchblade knife, on which flecks of blood were later discovered, and an envelope addressed to lieutenant peyton. it contained a hand-printed note: "gil bukowski's waiting for his wife to come home. he'll have a long wait. mephistopheles.""i know this guy," said patti."so do we. george welch.""i decided," said jimmy at his next session with dr. larsen, "i'd gotten as far as i could with welch's yearbook; and if he was really killing them 'cause they rejected him, like you said, i'd better just shadow him till he made his next move." he shook his head. "dad must've asked seven years ago about guys they were having trouble with.""pretty girls don't comment on every guy who gets too persistent; there's just too many of them. and i doubt welch's victims realized how sick he was.""but how did you know it was him?"dr. larsen's face soured. "i didn't know diddly. i just made some good guesses."like he lied about what he was doing at the scene of the crime, which i hear you cops have a way of considering suspicious. i mean, we're supposed to believe she was dressed the way you say she was because she expected the kind of guy you say welch was? come now."and it would answer your father's question--you know, why would lucy welch let mephistopheles walk right up to her in her own bedroom?--if until recently it'd been his bedroom too."but the closest i came to a brilliant deduction like william powell and warner oland and basil rathbone in all those old movies was: seven years ago in june, the mephistopheles murders mysteriously stopped. one month later, welch turns up at a fourth of july party, engaged to lucy. and no sooner does lucy dump welch than mephistopheles comes out of retirement and makes her his next victim. i mean, i wouldn't hang anybody on that; but it does bear checking out."now that i've answered your question, i've got one.""okay.""why were you so hung up on this guy?" jimmy was still trying to formulate an answer when the doctor added, "in other words, how much of you do you see in him?"he had a way of returning abruptly to the point.most people who bother with the matter at all would admit that the english language is in a bad way, but it is generally assumed that we cannot by conscious action do anything about it. our civilization is decadent, and our language--so the argument runs--must inevitably share in the general collapse. it follows that any struggle against the abuse of language is a sentimental archaism, like preferring candles to electric light or hansom cabs to aeroplanes. underneath this lies the half-conscious belief that language is a natural growth and not an instrument which we shape for our own purposes.now, it is clear that the decline of a language must ultimately have political and economic causes: it is not due simply to the bad influence of this or that individual writer. but an effect can become a cause, reinforcing the original cause and producing the same effect in an intensified form, and so on indefinitely. a man may take to drink because he feels himself to be a failure, and then fail all the more completely because he drinks. it is rather the same thing that is happening to the english language. it becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to have foolish thoughts. the point is that the process is reversible. modern english, especially written english, is full of bad habits which spread by imitation and which can be avoided if one is willing to take the necessary trouble. if one gets rid of these habits one can think more clearly, and to think clearly is a necessary first step towards political regeneration: so that the fight against bad english is not frivolous and is not the exclusive concern of professional writers. i will come back to this presently, and i hope that by that time the meaning of what i have said here will have become clearer. meanwhile, here are five specimens of the english language as it is now habitually written.these five passages have not been picked out because they are especially bad--i could have quoted far worse if i had chosen--but because they illustrate various of the mental vices from which we now suffer. they are a little below the average, but are fairly representative samples. i number them so that i can refer back to them when necessary:(1) i am not, indeed, sure whether it is not true to say that the milton who once seemed not unlike a seventeenth-century shelley had not become, out of an experience ever more bitter in each year, more alien (sic) to the founder of that jesuit sect which nothing could induce him to tolerate.professor harold laski (essay in freedom of expression)(2) above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of idioms which prescribes such egregious collocations of vocables as the basic put up with for tolerate or put at a loss for bewilder.professor lancelot hogben (interglossa)(3) on the one side we have the free personality; by definition it is not neurotic, for it has neither conflict nor dream. its desires, such as they are, are transparent, for they are just what institutional approval keeps in the forefront of consciousness; another institutional pattern would alter their number and intensity; there is little in them that is natural, irreducible, or culturally dangerous. but on the other side, the social bond itself is nothing but the mutual reflection of these self-secure integrities. recall the definition of love. is not this the very picture of a small academic? where is there a place in this hall of mirrors for either personality or fraternity?essay on psychology in politics (new york)(4) all the "best people" from the gentlemen's clubs, and all the frantic fascist captains, united in common hatred of socialism and bestial horror of the rising tide of the mass revolutionary movement, have turned to acts of provocation, to foul incendiarism, to medieval legends of poisoned wells, to legalize their own destruction of proletarian organizations, and rouse the agitated petty-bourgeoisie to chauvinistic fervor on behalf of the fight against the revolutionary way out of the crisis.communist pamphlet(5) if a new spirit is to be infused into this old country, there is one thorny and contentious reform which must be tackled, and that is the humanization and galvanization of the b.b.c. timidity here will bespeak canker and atrophy of the soul. the heart of britain may lee sound and of strong beat, for instance, but the british lion's roar at present is like that of bottom in shakespeare's midsummer night's dream--as gentle as any sucking dove. a virile new britain cannot continue indefinitely to be traduced in the eyes, or rather ears, of the world by the effete languors of langham place, brazenly masquerading as "standard english." when the voice of britain is heard at nine o'clock, better far and infinitely less ludicrous to hear aitches honestly dropped than the present priggish, inflated, inhibited, school-ma'am-ish arch braying of blameless bashful mewing maidens.letter in tribuneeach of these passages has faults of its own, but quite apart from avoidable ugliness, two qualities are common to all of them. the first is staleness of imagery; the other is lack of precision. the writer either has a meaning and cannot express it, or he inadvertently says something else, or he is almost indifferent as to whether his words mean anything or not. this mixture of vagueness and sheer incompetence is the most marked characteristic of modern english prose, and especially of any kind of political writing. as soon as certain topics are raised, the concrete melts into the abstract and no one seems able to think of turns of speech that are not hackneyed: prose consists less and less of words chosen for the sake of their meaning, and more and more of phrases tacked together like the sections of a prefabricated hen-house. i list below, with notes and examples, various of the tricks by means of which the work of prose-construction is habitually dodged:dying metaphors. a newly-invented metaphor assists thought by evoking a visual image, while on the other hand a metaphor which is technically "dead" (e.g., iron resolution) has in effect reverted to being an ordinary word and can generally be used without loss of vividness. but in between these two classes there is a huge dump of worn-out metaphors which have lost all evocative power and are merely used because they save people the trouble of inventing phrases for themselves. examples are: ring the changes on, take up the cudgels for, toe the line, ride roughshod over, stand shoulder to shoulder with, play into the hands of, an axe to grind, grist to the mill, fishing in troubled waters, on the order of the day, achilles' heel, swan song, hotbed. many of these are used without knowledge of their meaning (what is a "rift," for instance?), and incompatible metaphors are frequently mixed, a sure sign that the writer is not interested in what he is saying. some metaphors now current have been twisted out of their original meaning without those who use them even being aware of the fact. for example, toe the line is sometimes written tow the line. another example is the hammer and the anvil, now always used with the implication that the anvil gets the worst of it. in real life it is always the anvil that breaks the hammer, never the other way about: a writer who stopped to think what he was saying would be aware of this, and would avoid perverting the original phrase.operators, or verbal false limbs. these save  the trouble of picking out appropriate verbs and nouns, and at the same time pad each sentence with extra syllables which give it an appearance of symmetry. characteristic phrases are: render inoperative, militate against, prove unacceptable, make contact with, be subjected to, give rise to, give grounds for, having the effect of, play a leading part (role) in, make itself felt, take effect, exhibit a tendency to, serve the purpose of, etc., etc. the keynote is the elimination of simple verbs. instead of being a single word, such as break, stop, spoil, mend, kill, a verb becomes a phrase, made up of a noun or adjective tacked on to some general-purposes verb as prove, serve, form, play, render. in addition, the passive voice is wherever possible used in preference to the active, and noun constructions are used instead of gerunds (by examination of instead of by examining). the range of verbs is further cut down by means of the -ize and de- formations, and banal statements are given an appearance of profundity by means of the not un- formation. simple conjunctions and prepositions are replaced by such phrases as with respect to, having regard to, the fact that, by dint of, in view of, in the interests of, on the hypothesis that; and the ends of sentences are saved from anti-climax by such resounding commonplaces as greatly to be desired, cannot be left out of account, a development to be expected in the near future, deserving of serious consideration, brought to a satisfactory conclusion, and so on and so forth.pretentious diction. words like phenomenon, element, individual (as noun), objective, categorical, effective, virtual, basis, primary, promote, constitute, exhibit, exploit, utilize, eliminate, liquidate, are used to dress up simple statements and give an air of scientific impartiality to biased judgments. adjectives like epoch-making, epic, historic, unforgettable, triumphant, age-old, inevitable, inexorable, veritable, are used to dignify the sordid processes of international politics, while writing that aims at glorifying war usually takes on an archaic color, its characteristic words being: realm, throne, chariot, mailed fist, trident, sword, shield, buckler, banner, jackboot, clarion. foreign words and expressions such as cul de sac, ancien regime, deus ex machina, mutatis mutandis, status quo, gleichschaltung, weltanschauung, are used to give an air of culture and elegance. except for the useful abbreviations i.e., e.g., and etc., there is no real need for any of the hundreds of foreign phrases now current in english. bad writers, and especially scientific, political and sociological writers, are nearly always haunted by the notion that latin or greek words are grander than saxon ones, and unnecessary words like expedite, ameliorate, predict, extraneous, deracinated, clandestine, subaqueous and hundreds of others constantly gain ground from their anglo-saxon opposite numbers.1 the jargon peculiar to marxist writing (hyena, hangman, cannibal, petty bourgeois, these gentry, lackey, flunkey, mad dog, white guard, etc.) consists largely of words and phrases translated from russian, german or french; but the normal way of coining a new word is to use a latin or greek root with the appropriate affix and, where necessary, the -ize formation. it is often easier to make up words of this kind (de-regionalize, impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary and so forth) than to think up the english words that will cover one's meaning. the result, in general, is an increase in slovenliness and vagueness.1 an interesting illustration of this is the way in which the english flower names which were in use till very recently are being ousted by greek ones, snap-dragon becoming antirrhinum, forget-me-not becoming myosotis, etc. it is hard to see any practical reason for this change of fashion: it is probably due to an instinctive turning-away from the more homely word and a vague feeling that the greek word is scientific.meaningless words. in certain kinds of writing, particularly in art criticism and literary criticism, it is normal to come across long passages which are almost completely lacking in meaning.2 words like romantic, plastic, values, human, dead, sentimental, natural, vitality, as used in art criticism, are strictly meaningless, in the sense that they not only do not point to any discoverable object, but are hardly even expected to do so by the reader. when one critic writes, "the outstanding feature of mr. x's work is its living quality," while another writes, "the immediately striking thing about mr. x's work is its peculiar deadness, the reader accepts this as a simple difference of opinion if words like black and white were involved, instead of the jargon words dead and living, he would see at once that language was being used in an improper way. many political words are similarly abused. the word fascism has now no meaning except in so far as it signifies "something not desirable." the words democracy, socialism, freedom, patriotic, realistic, justice, have each of them several different meanings which cannot be reconciled with one another. in the case of a word like democracy, not only is there no agreed definition, but the attempt to make one is resisted from all sides. it is almost universally felt that when we call a country democratic we are praising it: consequently the defenders of every kind of régime claim that it is a democracy, and fear that they might have to stop using the word if it were tied down to any one meaning. words of this kind are often used in a consciously dishonest way. that is, the person who uses them has his own private definition, but allows his hearer to think he means something quite different. statements like marshal pétain was a true patriot, the soviet press is the freest in the world, the catholic church is opposed to persecution, are almost always made with intent to deceive. other words used in variable meanings, in most cases more or less dishonestly, are: class, totalitarian, science, progressive, reactionary bourgeois, equality.2 example: "comfort's catholicity of perception and image, strangely whitmanesque in range, almost the exact opposite in aesthetic compulsion, continues to evoke that trembling atmospheric accumulative hinting at a cruel, an inexorably serene timelessness . . . wrey gardiner scores by aiming at simple bullseyes with precision. only they are not so simple, and through this contented sadness runs more than the surface bittersweet of resignation." (poetry quarterly.)now that i have made this catalogue of swindles and perversions, let me give another example of the kind of writing that they lead to. this time it must of its nature be an imaginary one. i am going to translate a passage of good english into modern english of the worst sort. here is a well-known verse from ecclesiastes:i returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.here it is in modern english:objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account.this is a parody, but not a very gross one. exhibit (3), above, for instance, contains several patches of the same kind of english. it will be seen that i have not made a full translation. the beginning and ending of the sentence follow the original meaning fairly closely, but in the middle the concrete illustrations--race, battle, bread--dissolve into the vague phrase "success or failure in competitive activities." this had to be so, because no modern writer of the kind i am discussing--no one capable of using phrases like objective consideration of contemporary phenomena"--would ever tabulate his thoughts in that precise and detailed way. the whole tendency of modern prose is away from concreteness. now analyze these two sentences a little more closely. the first contains 49 words but only 60 syllables, and all its words are those of everyday life. the second contains 38 words of 90 syllables: 18 of its words are from latin roots, and one from greek. the first sentence contains six vivid images, and only one phrase ("time and chance") that could be called vague. the second contains not a  single fresh, arresting phrase, and in spite of its 90 syllables it gives only a shortened version of the meaning contained in the first. yet without a doubt it is the second kind of sentence that is gaining ground in modern english. i do not want to exaggerate. this kind of writing is not yet universal, and outcrops of simplicity will occur here and there in the worst-written page. still, if you or i were told to write a few lines on the uncertainty of human fortunes, we should probably come much nearer to my imaginary sentence than to the one from ecclesiastes.as i have tried to show, modern writing at its worst does not consist in picking out words for the sake of their meaning and inventing images in order to make the meaning clearer. it consists in gumming together long strips of words which have already been set in order by someone else, and making the results presentable by sheer humbug. the attraction of this way of writing, is that it is easy. it is easier--even quicker, once you have the habit--to say in my opinion it is a not unjustifiable assumption that than to say i think. if you use ready-made phrases, you not only don't have to hunt about for words; you also don't have to bother with the rhythms of your sentences, since these phrases are generally so arranged as to be more or less euphonious. when you are composing in a hurry--when you are dictating to a stenographer, for instance, or making a public speech--it is natural to fall into a pretentious, latinized style. tags like a consideration which we should do well to bear in mind or a conclusion to which all of us would readily assent will save many a sentence from coming down with a bump. by using stale metaphors, similes and idioms, you save much mental effort at the cost of leaving your meaning vague, not only for your reader but for yourself. this is the significance of mixed metaphors. the sole aim of a metaphor is to call up a visual image. when these images clash--as in the fascist octopus has sung its swan song, the jackboot is thrown into the melting pot--it can be taken as certain that the writer is not seeing a mental image of the objects he is naming; in other words he is not really thinking. look again at the examples i gave at the beginning of this essay. professor laski (1) uses five negatives in 53 words. one of these is superfluous, making nonsense of the whole passage, and in addition there is the slip alien for akin, making further nonsense, and several avoidable pieces of clumsiness which increase the general vagueness. professor hogben (2) plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write prescriptions, and, while disapproving of the everyday phrase put up with, is unwilling to look egregious up in the dictionary and see what it means. (3), if one takes an uncharitable attitude towards it, is simply meaningless: probably one could work out its intended meaning by reading the whole of the article in which it occurs. in (4), the writer knows more or less what he wants to say, but an accumulation of stale phrases chokes him like tea leaves blocking a sink. in (5), words and meaning have almost parted company. people who write in this manner usually have a general emotional meaning--they dislike one thing and want to express solidarity with another--but they are not interested in the detail of what they are saying. a scrupulous writer, in every sentence that he writes, will ask himself at least four questions, thus: what am i trying to say? what words will express it? what image or idiom will make it clearer? is this image fresh enough to have an effect? and he will probably ask himself two more: could i put it more shortly? have i said anything that is avoidably ugly? but you are not obliged to go to all this trouble. you can shirk it by simply throwing your mind open and letting the ready-made phrases come crowding in. they will construct your sentences for you--even think your thoughts for you, to a certain extent-and at need they will perform the important service of partially concealing your meaning even from yourself. it is at this point that the special connection between politics and the debasement of language becomes clear.in our time it is broadly true that political writing is bad writing. where it is not true, it will generally be found that the writer is some kind of rebel, expressing his private opinions and not a "party line." orthodoxy, of whatever color, seems to demand a lifeless, imitative style. the political dialects to be found in pamphlets, leading articles, manifestoes, white papers and the speeches of under-secretaries do, of course, vary from party to party, but they are all alike in that one almost never finds in them a fresh, vivid, home-made turn of speech. when one watches some tired hack on the platform mechanically repeating the familiar phrases--bestial atrocities, iron heel, bloodstained tyranny, free peoples of the world, stand shoulder to shoulder--one often has a curious feeling that one is not watching a live human being but some kind of dummy: a feeling which suddenly becomes stronger at moments when the light catches the speaker's spectacles and turns them into blank discs which seem to have no eyes behind them. and this is not altogether fanciful. a speaker who uses that kind of phraseology has gone some distance towards turning himself into a machine. the appropriate noises are coming out of his larynx, but his brain is not involved as it would be if he were choosing his words for himself. if the speech he is making is one that he is accustomed to make over and over again, he may be almost unconscious of what he is saying, as one is when one utters the responses in church. and this reduced state of consciousness, if not indispensable, is at any rate favorable to political conformity.in our time, political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible. things like the continuance of british rule in india, the russian purges and deportations, the dropping of the atom bombs on japan, can indeed be defended, but only by arguments which are too brutal for most people to face, and which do not square with the professed aims of political parties. thus political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness. defenseless villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on fire with incendiary bullets: this is called pacification. millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no more than they can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers. people are imprisoned for years without trial, or shot in the back of the neck or sent to die of scurvy in arctic lumber camps: this is called elimination of unreliable elements. such phraseology is needed if one wants to name things without calling up mental pictures of them. consider for instance some comfortable english professor defending russian totalitarianism. he cannot say outright, "i believe in killing off your opponents when you can get good results by doing so." probably, therefore, he will say something like this:while freely conceding that the soviet régime exhibits certain features which the humanitarian may be inclined to deplore, we must, i think, agree that a certain curtailment of the right to political opposition is an unavoidable concomitant of transitional periods, and that the rigors which the russian people have been called upon to undergo have been amply justified in the sphere of concrete achievement.the inflated style is itself a kind of euphemism. a mass of latin words falls upon the facts like soft snow, blurring the outlines and covering up all the details. the great enemy of clear language is insincerity. when there is a gap between one's real and one's declared aims, one turns, as it were instinctively, to long words and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish squirting out ink. in our age there is no such thing as "keeping out of politics." all issues are political issues, and politics itself is a mass of lies, evasions, folly, hatred and schizophrenia. when the general atmosphere is bad, language must suffer. i should expect to find--this is a guess which i have not sufficient knowledge to verify--that the german, russian and italian languages have all deteriorated in the last ten or fifteen years as a result of dictatorship.but if thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought. a bad usage can spread by tradition and imitation, even among people who should and do know better. the debased language that i have been discussing is in some ways very convenient. phrases like a not unjustifiable assumption, leaves much to be desired, would serve no good purpose, a consideration which we should do well to bear in mind, are a continuous temptation, a packet of aspirins always at one's elbow. look back through this essay, and for certain you will find that i have again and again committed the very faults i am protesting against. by this morning's post i have received a pamphlet dealing with conditions in germany. the author tells me that he "felt impelled" to write it. i open it at random, and here is almost the first sentence that i see: "[the allies] have an opportunity not only of achieving a radical transformation of germany's social and political structure in such a way as to avoid a nationalistic reaction in germany itself, but at the same time of laying the foundations of a cooperative and unified europe." you see, he "feels impelled" to write--feels, presumably, that he has something new to say--and yet his words, like cavalry horses answering the bugle, group themselves automatically into the familiar dreary pattern. this invasion of one's mind by ready-made phrases (lay the foundations, achieve a radical transformation) can only be prevented if one is constantly on guard against them, and every such phrase anesthetizes a portion of one's brain.i said earlier that the decadence of our language is probably curable. those who deny this would argue, if they produced an argument at all, that language merely reflects existing social conditions, and that we cannot influence its development by any direct tinkering with words and constructions. so far as the general tone or spirit of a language goes, this may be true, but it is not true in detail. silly words and expressions have often disappeared, not through any evolutionary process but owing to the conscious action of a minority. two recent examples were explore every avenue and leave no stone unturned, which were killed by the jeers of a few journalists. there is a long list of fly-blown metaphors which could similarly be got rid of if enough people would interest themselves in the job; and it should also be possible to laugh the not un- formation out of existence,3 to reduce the amount of latin and greek in the average sentence, to drive out foreign phrases and strayed scientific words, and, in general, to make pretentiousness unfashionable. but all these are minor points. the defense of the english language implies more than this, and perhaps it is best to start by saying what it does not imply.3 one can cure oneself of the not un- formation by memorizing this sentence: a not unblack dog was chasing a not unsmall rabbit across a not ungreen field.to begin with, it has nothing to do with archaism, with the salvaging of obsolete words and turns of speech, or with the setting-up of a "standard-english" which must never be departed from. on the contrary, it is especially concerned with the scrapping of every word or idiom which has outworn its usefulness. it has nothing to do with correct grammar and syntax, which are of no importance so long as one makes one's meaning clear, or with the avoidance of americanisms, or with having what is called a "good prose style." on the other hand it is not concerned with fake simplicity and the attempt to make written english colloquial. nor does it even imply in every case preferring the saxon word to the latin one, though it does imply using the fewest and shortest words that will cover one's meaning. what is above all needed is to let the meaning choose the word, and not the other way about. in prose, the worst thing one can do with words is to surrender them. when you think of a concrete object, you think wordlessly, and then, if you want to describe the thing you have been visualizing, you probably hunt about till you find the exact words that seem to fit it. when you think of something abstract you are more inclined to use words from the start, and unless you make a conscious effort to prevent it, the existing dialect will come rushing in and do the job for you, at the expense of blurring or even changing your meaning. probably it is better to put off using words as long as possible and get one's meaning as clear as one can through pictures or sensations. afterwards one can choose--not simply accept--the phrases that will best cover the meaning, and then switch round and decide what impressions one's words are likely to make on another person. this last effort of the mind cuts out all stale or mixed images, all prefabricated phrases, needless repetitions, and humbug and vagueness generally. but one can often be in doubt about the effect of a word or a phrase, and one needs rules that one can rely on when instinct fails. i think the following rules will cover most cases:(i) never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print.(ii) never use a long word where a short one will do.(iii) if it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.(iv) never use the passive where you can use the active.(v) never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if you can think of an everyday english equivalent.(vi) break any of these rules sooner than say anything barbarous.these rules sound elementary, and so they are, but they demand a deep change of attitude in anyone who has grown used to writing in the style now fashionable. one could keep all of them and still write bad english, but one could not write the kind of stuff that i quoted in these five specimens at the beginning of this article.i have not here been considering the literary use of language, but merely language as an instrument for expressing and not for concealing or preventing thought. stuart chase and others have come near to claiming that all abstract words are meaningless, and have used this as a pretext for advocating a kind of political quietism. since you don't know what fascism is, how can you struggle against fascism? one need not swallow such absurdities as this, but one ought to recognize that the present political chaos is connected with the decay of language, and that one can probably bring about some improvement by starting at the verbal end. if you simplify your english, you are freed from the worst follies of orthodoxy. you cannot speak any of the necessary dialects, and when you make a stupid remark its stupidity will be obvious, even to yourself. political language-and with variations this is true of all political parties, from conservatives to anarchists--is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable. and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind. one cannot change this all in a moment, but one can at least change one's own habits, and from time to time one can even, if one jeers loudly enough, send some worn-out and useless phrase--some jackboot, achilles' heel, hotbed, melting pot, acid test, veritable inferno or other lump of verbal refuse--into the dustbin where it belongs.in moulmein, in lower burma, i was hated by large numbers of people--the only time in my life that i have been important enough for this to happen to me.  i was sub-divisional police officer of the town, and in an aimless, petty kind of way anti-european feeling was very bitter. no one had the guts to raise a riot, but if a european woman went through the bazaar alone somebody would probably spit betel juice over her dress. as a police officer i was an obvious target and was baited whenever it seemed safe to do so. when a nimble burman tripped me up on the football field and the referee another burman looked the other way, the crowd yelled with hideous laughter. this happened more than once. in the end the sneering yellow faces of young men that met me everywhere, the insults hooted after me when i was at a safe distance, got badly on my nerves. the young buddhist priests were the worst of all. there were several thousands of them in the town and none of them seemed to have anything to do except stand on street corners and jeer at europeans.all this was perplexing and upsetting. for at that time i had already made up my mind that imperialism was an evil thing and the sooner i chucked up my job and got out of it the better. theoretically--and secretly, of course--i was all for the burmese and all against their oppressors, the british. as for the job i was doing, i hated it more bitterly than i can perhaps make clear. in a job like that you see the dirty work of empire at close quarters. the wretched prisoners huddling in the stinking cages of the lock-ups, the grey, cowed faces of the long-term convicts, the scarred buttocks of the men who had been bogged with bamboos--all these oppressed me with an intolerable sense of guilt. but i could get nothing into perspective. i was young and ill-educated and i had had to think out my problems in the utter silence that is imposed on every englishman in the east. i did not even know that the british empire is dying, still less did i know that it is a great deal better than the younger empires that are going to supplant it. all i knew was that i was stuck between my hatred of the empire i served and my rage against the evil-spirited little beasts who tried to make my job impossible. with one part of my mind i thought of the british raj as an unbreakable tyranny, as something clamped down, in saecula saeculorum, upon the will of prostrate peoples; with another part i thought that the greatest joy in the world would be to drive a bayonet into a buddhist priest's guts. feelings like these are the normal by-products of imperialism; ask any anglo-indian official, if you can catch him off duty.one day something happened which in a roundabout way was enlightening. it was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a better glimpse than i had had before of the real nature of imperialism--the real motives for which despotic governments act. early one morning the sub-inspector at a police station the other end of the town rang me up on the phone and said that an elephant was ravaging the bazaar. would i please come and do something about it? i did not know what i could do, but i wanted to see what was happening and i got on to a pony and started out. i took my rifle, an old .44 winchester and much too small to kill an elephant, but i thought the noise might be useful in terrorem. various burmans stopped me on the way and told me about the elephant's doings. it was not, of course, a wild elephant, but a tame one which had gone "must." it had been chained up, as tame elephants always are when their attack of "must" is due, but on the previous night it had broken its chain and escaped. its mahout, the only person who could manage it when it was in that state, had set out in pursuit, but had taken the wrong direction and was now twelve hours' journey away, and in the morning the elephant had suddenly reappeared in the town. the burmese population had no weapons and were quite helpless against it. it had already destroyed somebody's bamboo hut, killed a cow and raided some fruit-stalls and devoured the stock; also it had met the municipal rubbish van and, when the driver jumped out and took to his heels, had turned the van over and inflicted violences upon it.the burmese sub-inspector and some indian constables were waiting for me in the quarter where the elephant had been seen. it was a very poor quarter, a labyrinth of squalid bamboo huts, thatched with palmleaf, winding all over a steep hillside. i remember that it was a cloudy, stuffy morning at the beginning of the rains. we began questioning the people as to where the elephant had gone and, as usual, failed to get any definite information. that is invariably the case in the east; a story always sounds clear enough at a distance, but the nearer you get to the scene of events the vaguer it becomes. some of the people said that the elephant had gone in one direction, some said that he had gone in another, some professed not even to have heard of any elephant. i had almost made up my mind that the whole story was a pack of lies, when we heard yells a little distance away. there was a loud, scandalized cry of "go away, child! go away this instant!" and an old woman with a switch in her hand came round the corner of a hut, violently shooing away a crowd of naked children. some more women followed, clicking their tongues and exclaiming; evidently there was something that the children ought not to have seen. i rounded the hut and saw a man's dead body sprawling in the mud. he was an indian, a black dravidian coolie, almost naked, and he could not have been dead many minutes. the people said that the elephant had come suddenly upon him round the corner of the hut, caught him with its trunk, put its foot on his back and ground him into the earth. this was the rainy season and the ground was soft, and his face had scored a trench a foot deep and a couple of yards long. he was lying on his belly with arms crucified and head sharply twisted to one side. his face was coated with mud, the eyes wide open, the teeth bared and grinning with an expression of unendurable agony. never tell me, by the way, that the dead look peaceful. most of the corpses i have seen looked devilish. the friction of the great beast's foot had stripped the skin from his back as neatly as one skins a rabbit. as soon as i saw the dead man i sent an orderly to a friend's house nearby to borrow an elephant rifle. i had already sent back the pony, not wanting it to go mad with fright and throw me if it smelt the elephant.the orderly came back in a few minutes with a rifle and five cartridges, and meanwhile some burmans had arrived and told us that the elephant was in the paddy fields below, only a few hundred yards away. as i started forward practically the whole population of the quarter flocked out of the houses and followed me. they had seen the rifle and were all shouting excitedly that i was going to shoot the elephant. they had not shown much interest in the elephant when he was merely ravaging their homes, but it was different now that he was going to be shot. it was a bit of fun to them, as it would be to an english crowd; besides they wanted the meat. it made me vaguely uneasy. i had no intention of shooting the elephant--i had merely sent for the rifle to defend myself if necessary--and it is always unnerving to have a crowd following you. i marched down the hill, looking and feeling a fool, with the rifle over my shoulder and an ever-growing army of people jostling at my heels. at the bottom, when you got away from the huts, there was a metalled road and beyond that a miry waste of paddy fields a thousand yards across, not yet ploughed but soggy from the first rains and dotted with coarse grass. the elephant was standing eight yards from the road, his left side towards us. he took not the slightest notice of the crowd's approach. he was tearing up bunches of grass, beating them against his knees to clean them and stuffing them into his mouth.i had halted on the road. as soon as i saw the elephant i knew with perfect certainty that i ought not to shoot him. it is a serious matter to shoot a working elephant--it is comparable to destroying a huge and costly piece of machinery--and obviously one ought not to do it if it can possibly be avoided. and at that distance, peacefully eating, the elephant looked no more dangerous than a cow. i thought then and i think now that his attack of "must" was already passing off; in which case he would merely wander harmlessly about until the mahout came back and caught him. moreover, i did not in the least want to shoot him. i decided that i would watch him for a little while to make sure that he did not turn savage again, and then go home.but at that moment i glanced round at the crowd that had followed me. it was an immense crowd, two thousand at the least and growing every minute. it blocked the road for a long distance on either side. i looked at the sea of yellow faces above the garish clothes-faces all happy and excited over this bit of fun, all certain that the elephant was going to be shot. they were watching me as they would watch a conjurer about to perform a trick. they did not like me, but with the magical rifle in my hands i was momentarily worth watching. and suddenly i realized that i should have to shoot the elephant after all. the people expected it of me and i had got to do it; i could feel their two thousand wills pressing me forward, irresistibly. and it was at this moment, as i stood there with the rifle in my hands, that i first grasped the hollowness, the futility of the white man's dominion in the east. here was i, the white man with his gun, standing in front of the unarmed native crowd--seemingly the leading actor of the piece; but in reality i was only an absurd puppet pushed to and fro by the will of those yellow faces behind. i perceived in this moment that when the white man turns tyrant it is his own freedom that he destroys. he becomes a sort of hollow, posing dummy, the conventionalized figure of a sahib. for it is the condition of his rule that he shall spend his life in trying to impress the "natives," and so in every crisis he has got to do what the "natives" expect of him. he wears a mask, and his face grows to fit it. i had got to shoot the elephant. i had committed myself to doing it when i sent for the rifle. a sahib has got to act like a sahib; he has got to appear resolute, to know his own mind and do definite things. to come all that way, rifle in hand, with two thousand people marching at my heels, and then to trail feebly away, having done nothing--no, that was impossible. the crowd would laugh at me. and my whole life, every white man's life in the east, was one long struggle not to be laughed at.but i did not want to shoot the elephant. i watched him beating his bunch of grass against his knees, with that preoccupied grandmotherly air that elephants have. it seemed to me that it would be murder to shoot him. at that age i was not squeamish about killing animals, but i had never shot an elephant and never wanted to. somehow it always seems worse to kill a large animal. besides, there was the beast's owner to be considered. alive, the elephant was worth at least a hundred pounds; dead, he would only be worth the value of his tusks, five pounds, possibly. but i had got to act quickly. i turned to some experienced-looking burmans who had been there when we arrived, and asked them how the elephant had been behaving. they all said the same thing: he took no notice of you if you left him alone, but he might charge if you went too close to him.it was perfectly clear to me what i ought to do. i ought to walk up to within, say, twenty-five yards of the elephant and test his behavior. if he charged, i could shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be safe to leave him until the mahout came back. but also i knew that i was going to do no such thing. i was a poor shot with a rifle and the ground was soft mud into which one would sink at every step. if the elephant charged and i missed him, i should have about as much chance as a toad under a steam-roller. but even then i was not thinking particularly of my own skin, only of the watchful yellow faces behind. for at that moment, with the crowd watching me, i was not afraid in the ordinary sense, as i would have been if i had been alone. a white man mustn't be frightened in front of "natives"; and so, in general, he isn't frightened. the sole thought in my mind was that if anything went wrong those two thousand burmans would see me pursued, caught, trampled on and reduced to a grinning corpse like that indian up the hill. and if that happened it was quite probable that some of them would laugh. that would never do.there was only one alternative. i shoved the cartridges into the magazine and lay down on the road to get a better aim. the crowd grew very still, and a deep, low, happy sigh, as of people who see the theatre curtain go up at last, breathed from innumerable throats. they were going to have their bit of fun after all. the rifle was a beautiful german thing with cross-hair sights. i did not then know that in shooting an elephant one would shoot to cut an imaginary bar running from ear-hole to ear-hole. i ought, therefore, as the elephant was sideways on, to have aimed straight at his ear-hole, actually i aimed several inches in front of this, thinking the brain would be further forward.when i pulled the trigger i did not hear the bang or feel the kick--one never does when a shot goes home--but i heard the devilish roar of glee that went up from the crowd. in that instant, in too short a time, one would have thought, even for the bullet to get there, a mysterious, terrible change had come over the elephant. he neither stirred nor fell, but every line of his body had altered. he looked suddenly stricken, shrunken, immensely old, as though the frighfful impact of the bullet had paralysed him without knocking him down. at last, after what seemed a long time--it might have been five seconds, i dare say--he sagged flabbily to his knees. his mouth slobbered. an enormous senility seemed to have settled upon him. one could have imagined him thousands of years old. i fired again into the same spot. at the second shot he did not collapse but climbed with desperate slowness to his feet and stood weakly upright, with legs sagging and head drooping. i fired a third time. that was the shot that did for him. you could see the agony of it jolt his whole body and knock the last remnant of strength from his legs. but in falling he seemed for a moment to rise, for as his hind legs collapsed beneath him he seemed to tower upward like a huge rock toppling, his trunk reaching skyward like a tree. he trumpeted, for the first and only time. and then down he came, his belly towards me, with a crash that seemed to shake the ground even where i lay.i got up. the burmans were already racing past me across the mud. it was obvious that the elephant would never rise again, but he was not dead. he was breathing very rhythmically with long rattling gasps, his great mound of a side painfully rising and falling. his mouth was wide open--i could see far down into caverns of pale pink throat. i waited a long time for him to die, but his breathing did not weaken. finally i fired my two remaining shots into the spot where i thought his heart must be. the thick blood welled out of him like red velvet, but still he did not die. his body did not even jerk when the shots hit him, the tortured breathing continued without a pause. he was dying, very slowly and in great agony, but in some world remote from me where not even a bullet could damage him further. i felt that i had got to put an end to that dreadful noise. it seemed dreadful to see the great beast lying there, powerless to move and yet powerless to die, and not even to be able to finish him. i sent back for my small rifle and poured shot after shot into his heart and down his throat. they seemed to make no impression. the tortured gasps continued as steadily as the ticking of a clock.in the end i could not stand it any longer and went away. i heard later that it took him half an hour to die. burmans were bringing dahs and baskets even before i left, and i was told they had stripped his body almost to the bones by the afternoon.afterwards, of course, there were endless discussions about the shooting of the elephant. the owner was furious, but he was only an indian and could do nothing. besides, legally i had done the right thing, for a mad elephant has to be killed, like a mad dog, if its owner fails to control it. among the europeans opinion was divided. the older men said i was right, the younger men said it was a damn shame to shoot an elephant for killing a coolie, because an elephant was worth more than any damn coringhee coolie. and afterwards i was very glad that the coolie had been killed; it put me legally in the right and it gave me a sufficient pretext for shooting the elephant. i often wondered whether any of the others grasped that i had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.lee surrendered the remnant of his army at appomattox, april 9, 1865, and yet a couple of days later the old colonel's battery lay intrenched right in the mountain-pass where it had halted three days before. two weeks previously it had been detailed with a light division sent to meet and repel a force which it was understood was coming in by way of the southwest valley to strike lee in the rear of his long line from richmond to petersburg. it had done its work. the mountain-pass had been seized and held, and the federal force had not gotten by that road within the blue rampart which guarded on that side the heart of virginia. this pass, which was the key to the main line of passage over the mountains, had been assigned by the commander of the division to the old colonel and his old battery, and they had held it. the position taken by the battery had been chosen with a soldier's eye. a better place could not have been selected to hold the pass. it was its highest point, just where the road crawled over the shoulder of the mountain along the limestone cliff, a hundred feet sheer above the deep river, where its waters had cut their way in ages past, and now lay deep and silent, as if resting after their arduous toil before they began to boil over the great bowlders which filled the bed a hundred or more yards below.the little plateau at the top guarded the descending road on either side for nearly a mile, and the mountain on the other side of the river was the centre of a clump of rocky, heavily timbered spurs, so inaccessible that no feet but those of wild animals or of the hardiest hunter had ever climbed it. on the side of the river on which the road lay, the only path out over the mountain except the road itself was a charcoal-burner's track, dwindling at times to a footway known only to the mountain-folk, which a picket at the top could hold against an army. the position, well defended, was impregnable, and it was well defended. this the general of the division knew when he detailed the old colonel and gave him his order to hold the pass until relieved, and not let his guns fall into the hands of the enemy. he knew both the colonel and his battery. the battery was one of the oldest in the army. it had been in the service since april, 1861, and its commander had come to be known as "the wheel horse of his division". he was, perhaps, the oldest officer of his rank in his branch of the service. although he had bitterly opposed secession, and was many years past the age of service when the war came on, yet as soon as the president called on the state for her quota of troops to coerce south carolina, he had raised and uniformed an artillery company, and offered it, not to the president of the united states, but to the governor of virginia.it is just at this point that he suddenly looms up to me as a soldier; the relation he never wholly lost to me afterward, though i knew him for many, many years of peace. his gray coat with the red facing and the bars on the collar; his military cap; his gray flannel shirt -- it was the first time i ever saw him wear anything but immaculate linen -- his high boots; his horse caparisoned with a black, high-peaked saddle, with crupper and breast-girth, instead of the light english hunting-saddle to which i had been accustomed, all come before me now as if it were but the other day. i remember but little beyond it, yet i remember, as if it were yesterday, his leaving home, and the scenes which immediately preceded it; the excitement created by the news of the president's call for troops; the unanimous judgment that it meant war; the immediate determination of the old colonel, who had hitherto opposed secession, that it must be met; the suppressed agitation on the plantation, attendant upon the tender of his services and the governor's acceptance of them. the prompt and continuous work incident to the enlistment of the men, the bustle of preparation, and all the scenes of that time, come before me now. it turned the calm current of the life of an old and placid country neighborhood, far from any city or centre, and stirred it into a boiling torrent, strong enough, or fierce enough to cut its way and join the general torrent which was bearing down and sweeping everything before it. it seemed but a minute before the quiet old plantation, in which the harvest, the corn-shucking, and the christmas holidays alone marked the passage of the quiet seasons, and where a strange carriage or a single horseman coming down the big road was an event in life, was turned into a depot of war-supplies, and the neighborhood became a parade-ground. the old colonel, not a colonel yet, nor even a captain, except by brevet, was on his horse by daybreak and off on his rounds through the plantations and the pines enlisting his company. the office in the yard, heretofore one in name only, became one now in reality, and a table was set out piled with papers, pens, ink, books of tactics and regulation, at which men were accepted and enrolled. soldiers seemed to spring from the ground, as they did from the sowing of the dragon's teeth in the days of cadmus. men came up the high road or down the paths across the fields, sometimes singly, but oftener in little parties of two or three, and, asking for the captain, entered the office as private citizens and came out soldiers enlisted for the war. there was nothing heard of on the plantation except fighting; white and black, all were at work, and all were eager; the servants contended for the honor of going with their master; the women flocked to the house to assist in the work of preparation, cutting out and making under-clothes, knitting socks, picking lint, preparing bandages, and sewing on uniforms; for many of the men who had enlisted were of the poorest class, far too poor to furnish anything themselves, and their equipment had to be contributed mainly by wealthier neighbors. the work was carried on at night as well as by day, for the occasion was urgent. meantime the men were being drilled by the captain and his lieutenants, who had been militia officers of old. we were carried to see the drill at the cross-roads, and a brave sight it seemed to us: the lines marching and countermarching in the field, with the horses galloping as they wheeled amid clouds of dust, at the hoarse commands of the excited officers, and the roadside lined with spectators of every age and condition. i recall the arrival of the messenger one night, with the telegraphic order to the captain to report with his company at "camp lee" immediately; the hush in the parlor that attended its reading; then the forced beginning of the conversation afterwards in a somewhat strained and unnatural key, and the captain's quick and decisive outlining of his plans.within the hour a dozen messengers were on their way in various directions to notify the members of the command of the summons, and to deliver the order for their attendance at a given point next day. it seemed that a sudden and great change had come. it was the actual appearance of what had hitherto only been theoretical -- war. the next morning the captain, in full uniform, took leave of the assembled plantation, with a few solemn words commending all he left behind to god, and galloped away up the big road to join and lead his battery to the war, and to be gone just four years.within a month he was on "the peninsula" with magruder, guarding virginia on the east against the first attack. his camp was first at yorktown and then on jamestown island, the honor having been assigned his battery of guarding the oldest cradle of the race on this continent. it was at "little bethel" that his guns were first trained on the enemy, and that the battery first saw what they had to do, and from this time until the middle of april, 1865, they were in service, and no battery saw more service or suffered more in it. its story was a part of the story of the southern army in virginia. the captain was a rigid disciplinarian, and his company had more work to do than most new companies. a pious churchman, of the old puritanical type not uncommon to virginia, he looked after the spiritual as well as the physical welfare of his men, and his chaplain or he read prayers at the head of his company every morning during the war. at first he was not popular with the men, he made the duties of camp life so onerous to them, it was "nothing but drilling and praying all the time," they said. but he had not commanded very long before they came to know the stuff that was in him. he had not been in service a year before he had had four horses shot under him, and when later on he was offered the command of a battalion, the old company petitioned to be one of his batteries, and still remained under his command. before the first year was out the battery had, through its own elements, and the discipline of the captain, become a cohesive force, and a distinct integer in the army of northern virginia. young farmer recruits knew of its prestige and expressed preference for it of many batteries of rapidly growing or grown reputation. owing to its high stand, the old and clumsy guns with which it had started out were taken from it, and in their place was presented a battery of four fine, brass, twelve-pound napoleons of the newest and most approved kind, and two three-inch parrotts, all captured. the men were as pleased with them as children with new toys. the care and attention needed to keep them in prime order broke the monotony of camp life. they soon had abundant opportunities to test their power. they worked admirably, carried far, and were extraordinarily accurate in their aim. the men from admiration of their guns grew to have first a pride in, and then an affection for, them, and gave them nicknames as they did their comrades; the four napoleons being dubbed "the evangelists", and the two rifles being "the eagle", because of its scream and force, and "the cat", because when it became hot from rapid firing "it jumped," they said, "like a cat." from many a hill-top in virginia, maryland, and pennsylvania "the evangelists" spoke their hoarse message of battle and death, "the eagle" screamed her terrible note, and "the cat" jumped as she spat her deadly shot from her hot throat. in the valley of virginia; on the levels of henrico and hanover; on the slopes of manassas; in the woods of chancellorsville; on the heights of fredericksburg; at antietam and gettysburg; in the spottsylvania wilderness, and again on the hanover levels and on the lines before petersburg, the old guns through nearly four years roared from fiery throats their deadly messages. the history of the battery was bound up with the history of lee's army. a rivalry sprang up among the detachments of the different guns, and their several records were jealously kept. the number of duels each gun was in was carefully counted, every scar got in battle was treasured, and the men around their camp-fires, at their scanty messes, or on the march, bragged of them among themselves and avouched them as witnesses. new recruits coming in to fill the gaps made by the killed and disabled, readily fell in with the common mood and caught the spirit like a contagion. it was not an uncommon thing for a wheel to be smashed in by a shell, but if it happened to one gun oftener than to another there was envy. two of the evangelists seemed to be especially favored in this line, while the cat was so exempt as to become the subject of some derision. the men stood by the guns till they were knocked to pieces, and when the fortune of the day went against them, had with their own hands oftener than once saved them after most of their horses were killed.this had happened in turn to every gun, the men at times working like beavers in mud up to their thighs and under a murderous fire to get their guns out. many a man had been killed tugging at trail or wheel when the day was against them; but not a gun had ever been lost. at last the evil day arrived. at winchester a sudden and impetuous charge for a while swept everything before it, and carried the knoll where the old battery was posted; but all the guns were got out by the toiling and rapidly dropping men, except the cat, which was captured with its entire detachment working at it until they were surrounded and knocked from the piece by cavalrymen. most of the men who were not killed were retaken before the day was over, with many guns; but the cat was lost. she remained in the enemy's hands and probably was being turned against her old comrades and lovers. the company was inconsolable. the death of comrades was too natural and common a thing to depress the men beyond what such occurrences necessarily did; but to lose a gun! it was like losing the old colonel; it was worse: a gun was ranked as a brigadier; and the cat was equal to a major-general. the other guns seemed lost without her; the eagle especially, which generally went next to her, appeared to the men to have a lonely and subdued air. the battery was no longer the same: it seemed broken and depleted, shrunken to a mere section. it was worse than cold harbor, where over half the men were killed or wounded. the old captain, now colonel of the battalion, appreciated the loss and apprehended its effect on the men as much as they themselves did, and application was made for a gun to take the place of the lost piece; but there was none to be had, as the men said they had known all along. it was added -- perhaps by a department clerk -- that if they wanted a gun to take the place of the one they had lost, they had better capture it. "by ----, we will," they said -- adding epithets, intended for the department clerk in his "bomb-proof", not to be printed in this record -- and they did. for some time afterwards in every engagement into which they got there used to be speculation among them as to whether the cat were not there on the other side; some of the men swearing they could tell her report, and even going to the rash length of offering bets on her presence.by one of those curious coincidences, as strange as anything in fiction, a new general had, in 1864, come down across the rapidan to take richmond, and the old battery had found a hill-top in the line in which lee's army lay stretched across "the wilderness" country to stop him. the day, though early in may, was a hot one, and the old battery, like most others, had suffered fearfully. two of the guns had had wheels cut down by shells and the men had been badly cut up; but the fortune of the day had been with lee, and a little before nightfall, after a terrible fight, there was a rapid advance, lee's infantry sweeping everything before it, and the artillery, after opening the way for the charge, pushing along with it; now unlimbering as some vantage-ground was gained, and using canister with deadly effect; now driving ahead again so rapidly that it was mixed up with the muskets when the long line of breastworks was carried with a rush, and a line of guns were caught still hot from their rapid work. as the old battery, with lathered horses and smoke-grimed men, swung up the crest and unlimbered on the captured breastwork, a cheer went up which was heard even above the long general yell of the advancing line, and for a moment half the men in the battery crowded together around some object on the edge of the redoubt, yelling like madmen. the next instant they divided, and there was the cat, smoke-grimed and blood-stained and still sweating hot from her last fire, being dragged from her muddy ditch by as many men as could get hold of trail-rope or wheel, and rushed into her old place beside the eagle, in time to be double-shotted with canister to the muzzle, and to pour it from among her old comrades into her now retiring former masters. still, she had a new carriage, and her record was lost, while those of the other guns had been faithfully kept by the men. this made a difference in her position for which even the bullets in her wheels did not wholly atone; even harris, the sergeant of her detachment, felt that.it was only a few days later, however, that abundant atonement was made. the new general did not retire across the rapidan after his first defeat, and a new battle had to be fought: a battle, if anything, more furious, more terrible than the first, when the dead filled the trenches and covered the fields. he simply marched by the left flank, and lee marching by the right flank to head him, flung himself upon him again at spottsylvania court-house. that day the cat, standing in her place behind the new and temporary breastwork thrown up when the battery was posted, had the felloes of her wheels, which showed above the top of the bank, entirely cut away by minie-bullets, so that when she jumped in the recoil her wheels smashed and let her down. this covered all old scores. the other guns had been cut down by shells or solid shot; but never before had one been gnawed down by musket-balls. from this time all through the campaign the cat held her own beside her brazen and bloody sisters, and in the cold trenches before petersburg that winter, when the new general -- starvation -- had joined the one already there, she made her bloody mark as often as any gun on the long lines.thus the old battery had come to be known, as its old commander, now colonel of a battalion, had come to be known by those in yet higher command. and when in the opening spring of 1865 it became apparent to the leaders of both armies that the long line could not longer be held if a force should enter behind it, and, sweeping the one partially unswept portion of virginia, cut the railways in the southwest, and a man was wanted to command the artillery in the expedition sent to meet this force, it was not remarkable that the old colonel and his battalion should be selected for the work. the force sent out was but small; for the long line was worn to a thin one in those days, and great changes were taking place, the consequences of which were known only to the commanders. in a few days the commander of the expedition found that he must divide his small force for a time, at least, to accomplish his purpose, and sending the old colonel with one battery of artillery to guard one pass, must push on over the mountain by another way to meet the expected force, if possible, and repel it before it crossed the farther range. thus the old battery, on an april evening of 1865, found itself toiling alone up the steep mountain road which leads above the river to the gap, which formed the chief pass in that part of the blue ridge. both men and horses looked, in the dim and waning light of the gray april day, rather like shadows of the beings they represented than the actual beings themselves. and anyone seeing them as they toiled painfully up, the thin horses floundering in the mud, and the men, often up to their knees, tugging at the sinking wheels, now stopping to rest, and always moving so slowly that they seemed scarcely to advance at all, might have thought them the ghosts of some old battery lost from some long gone and forgotten war on that deep and desolate mountain road. often, when they stopped, the blowing of the horses and the murmuring of the river in its bed below were the only sounds heard, and the tired voices of the men when they spoke among themselves seemed hardly more articulate sounds than they. then the voice of the mounted figure on the roan horse half hidden in the mist would cut in, clear and inspiring, in a tone of encouragement more than of command, and everything would wake up: the drivers would shout and crack their whips; the horses would bend themselves on the collars and flounder in the mud; the men would spring once more to the mud-clogged wheels, and the slow ascent would begin again.the orders to the colonel, as has been said, were brief: to hold the pass until he received further instructions, and not to lose his guns. to be ordered, with him, was to obey. the last streak of twilight brought them to the top of the pass; his soldier's instinct and a brief recognizance made earlier in the day told him that this was his place, and before daybreak next morning the point was as well fortified as a night's work by weary and supperless men could make it. a prettier spot could not have been found for the purpose; a small plateau, something over an acre in extent, where a charcoal-burner's hut had once stood, lay right at the top of the pass. it was a little higher on either side than in the middle, where a small brook, along which the charcoal-burner's track was yet visible, came down from the wooded mountain above, thus giving a natural crest to aid the fortification on either side, with open space for the guns, while the edge of the wood coming down from the mountain afforded shelter for the camp.as the battery was unsupported it had to rely on itself for everything, a condition which most soldiers by this time were accustomed to. a dozen or so of rifles were in the camp, and with these pickets were armed and posted. the pass had been seized none too soon; a scout brought in the information before nightfall that the invading force had crossed the farther range before that sent to meet it could get there, and taking the nearest road had avoided the main body opposing it, and been met only by a rapidly moving detachment, nothing more than a scouting party, and now were advancing rapidly on the road on which they were posted, evidently meaning to seize the pass and cross the mountain at this point. the day was sunday; a beautiful spring sunday; but it was no sabbath for the old battery. all day the men worked, making and strengthening their redoubt to guard the pass, and by the next morning, with the old battery at the top, it was impregnable. they were just in time. before noon their vedettes brought in word that the enemy were ascending the mountain, and the sun had hardly turned when the advance guard rode up, came within range of the picket, and were fired on.it was apparent that they supposed the force there only a small one, for they retired and soon came up again reinforced in some numbers, and a sharp little skirmish ensued, hot enough to make them more prudent afterwards, though the picket retired up the mountain. this gave them encouragement and probably misled them, for they now advanced boldly. they saw the redoubt on the crest as they came on, and unlimbering a section or two, flung a few shells up at it, which either fell short or passed over without doing material damage. none of the guns was allowed to respond, as the distance was too great with the ammunition the battery had, and, indifferent as it was, it was too precious to be wasted in a duel at an ineffectual range. doubtless deceived by this, the enemy came on in force, being obliged by the character of the ground to keep almost entirely to the road, which really made them advance in column. the battery waited. under orders of the colonel the guns standing in line were double-shotted with canister, and, loaded to the muzzle, were trained down to sweep the road at from four to five hundred yards' distance. and when the column reached this point the six guns, aimed by old and skilful gunners, at a given word swept road and mountain-side with a storm of leaden hail. it was a fire no mortal man could stand up against, and the practised gunners rammed their pieces full again, and before the smoke had cleared or the reverberation had died away among the mountains, had fired the guns again and yet again. the road was cleared of living things when the draught setting down the river drew the smoke away; but it was no discredit to the other force; for no army that was ever uniformed could stand against that battery in that pass. again and again the attempt was made to get a body of men up under cover of the woods and rocks on the mountain-side, while the guns below utilized their better ammunition from longer range; but it was useless. although one of the lieutenants and several men were killed in the skirmish, and a number more were wounded, though not severely, the old battery commanded the mountain-side, and its skilful gunners swept it at every point the foot of man could scale. the sun went down flinging his last flame on a victorious battery still crowning the mountain pass. the dead were buried by night in a corner of the little plateau, borne to their last bivouac on the old gun-carriages which they had stood by so often -- which the men said would "sort of ease their minds."the next day the fight was renewed, and with the same result. the old battery in its position was unconquerable. only one fear now faced them; their ammunition was getting as low as their rations; another such day or half-day would exhaust it. a sergeant was sent back down the mountain to try to get more, or, if not, to get tidings. the next day it was supposed the fight would be renewed; and the men waited, alert, eager, vigilant, their spirits high, their appetite for victory whetted by success. the men were at their breakfast, or what went for breakfast, scanty at all times, now doubly so, hardly deserving the title of a meal, so poor and small were the portions of cornmeal, cooked in their frying-pans, which went for their rations, when the sound of artillery below broke on the quiet air. they were on their feet in an instant and at the guns, crowding upon the breastwork to look or to listen; for the road, as far as could be seen down the mountain, was empty except for their own picket, and lay as quiet as if sleeping in the balmy air. and yet volley after volley of artillery came rolling up the mountain. what could it mean? that the rest of their force had come up and was engaged with that at the foot of the mountain? the colonel decided to be ready to go and help them; to fall on the enemy in the rear; perhaps they might capture the entire force. it seemed the natural thing to do, and the guns were limbered up in an incredibly short time, and a roadway made through the intrenchment, the men working like beavers under the excitement. before they had left the redoubt, however, the vedettes sent out returned and reported that there was no engagement going on, and the firing below seemed to be only practising. there was quite a stir in the camp below; but they had not even broken camp. this was mysterious. perhaps it meant that they had received reinforcements, but it was a queer way of showing it. the old colonel sighed as he thought of the good ammunition they could throw away down there, and of his empty limber-chests. it was necessary to be on the alert, however; the guns were run back into their old places, and the horses picketed once more back among the trees. meantime he sent another messenger back, this time a courier, for he had but one commissioned officer left, and the picket below was strengthened.the morning passed and no one came; the day wore on and still no advance was made by the force below. it was suggested that the enemy had left; he had, at least, gotten enough of that battery. a reconnoissance, however, showed that he was still encamped at the foot of the mountain. it was conjectured that he was trying to find a way around to take them in the rear, or to cross the ridge by the footpath. preparation was made to guard more closely the mountain-path across the spur, and a detachment was sent up to strengthen the picket there. the waiting told on the men and they grew bored and restless. they gathered about the guns in groups and talked; talked of each piece some, but not with the old spirit and vim; the loneliness of the mountain seemed to oppress them; the mountains stretching up so brown and gray on one side of them, and so brown and gray on the other, with their bare, dark forests soughing from time to time as the wind swept up the pass. the minds of the men seemed to go back to the time when they were not so alone, but were part of a great and busy army, and some of them fell to talking of the past, and the battles they had figured in, and of the comrades they had lost. they told them off in a slow and colorless way, as if it were all part of the past as much as the dead they named. one hundred and nineteen times they had been in action. only seventeen men were left of the eighty odd who had first enlisted in the battery, and of these four were at home crippled for life. two of the oldest men had been among the half-dozen who had fallen in the skirmish just the day before. it looked tolerably hard to be killed that way after passing for four years through such battles as they had been in; and both had wives and children at home, too, and not a cent to leave them to their names. they agreed calmly that they'd have to "sort of look after them a little" if they ever got home. these were some of the things they talked about as they pulled their old worn coats about them, stuffed their thin, weather-stained hands in their ragged pockets to warm them, and squatted down under the breastwork to keep a little out of the wind. one thing they talked about a good deal was something to eat. they described meals they had had at one time or another as personal adventures, and discussed the chances of securing others in the future as if they were prizes of fortune. one listening and seeing their thin, worn faces and their wasted frames might have supposed they were starving, and they were, but they did not say so.towards the middle of the afternoon there was a sudden excitement in the camp. a dozen men saw them at the same time: a squad of three men down the road at the farthest turn, past their picket; but an advancing column could not have created as much excitement, for the middle man carried a white flag. in a minute every man in the battery was on the breastwork. what could it mean! it was a long way off, nearly half a mile, and the flag was small: possibly only a pocket-handkerchief or a napkin; but it was held aloft as a flag unmistakably. a hundred conjectures were indulged in. was it a summons to surrender? a request for an armistice for some purpose? or was it a trick to ascertain their number and position? some held one view, some another. some extreme ones thought a shot ought to be fired over them to warn them not to come on; no flags of truce were wanted. the old colonel, who had walked to the edge of the plateau outside the redoubt and taken his position where he could study the advancing figures with his field-glass, had not spoken. the lieutenant who was next in command to him had walked out after him, and stood near him, from time to time dropping a word or two of conjecture in a half-audible tone; but the colonel had not answered a word; perhaps none was expected. suddenly he took his glass down, and gave an order to the lieutenant: "take two men and meet them at the turn yonder; learn their business; and act as your best judgment advises. if necessary to bring the messenger farther, bring only the officer who has the flag, and halt him at that rock yonder, where i will join him." the tone was as placid as if such an occurrence came every day. two minutes later the lieutenant was on his way down the mountain and the colonel had the men in ranks. his face was as grave and his manner as quiet as usual, neither more nor less so. the men were in a state of suppressed excitement. having put them in charge of the second sergeant the colonel returned to the breastwork. the two officers were slowly ascending the hill, side by side, the bearer of the flag, now easily distinguishable in his jaunty uniform as a captain of cavalry, talking, and the lieutenant in faded gray, faced with yet more faded red, walking beside him with a face white even at that distance, and lips shut as though they would never open again. they halted at the big bowlder which the colonel had indicated, and the lieutenant, having saluted ceremoniously, turned to come up to the camp; the colonel, however, went down to meet him. the two men met, but there was no spoken question; if the colonel inquired it was only with the eyes. the lieutenant spoke, however. "he says," he began and stopped, then began again -- "he says, general lee --" again he choked, then blurted out, "i believe it is all a lie -- a damned lie.""not dead? not killed?" said the colonel, quickly."no, not so bad as that; surrendered: surrendered his entire army at appomattox day before yesterday. i believe it is all a damned lie," he broke out again, as if the hot denial relieved him. the colonel simply turned away his face and stepped a pace or two off, and the two men stood motionless back to back for more than a minute. then the colonel stirred."shall i go back with you?" the lieutenant asked, huskily.the colonel did not answer immediately. then he said: "no, go back to camp and await my return." he said nothing about not speaking of the report. he knew it was not needed. then he went down the hill slowly alone, while the lieutenant went up to the camp.the interview between the two officers beside the bowlder was not a long one. it consisted of a brief statement by the federal envoy of the fact of lee's surrender two days before near appomattox court-house, with the sources of his information, coupled with a formal demand on the colonel for his surrender. to this the colonel replied that he had been detached and put under command of another officer for a specific purpose, and that his orders were to hold that pass, which he should do until he was instructed otherwise by his superior in command. with that they parted, ceremoniously, the federal captain returning to where he had left his horse in charge of his companions a little below, and the old colonel coming slowly up the hill to camp. the men were at once set to work to meet any attack which might be made. they knew that the message was of grave import, but not of how grave. they thought it meant that another attack would be made immediately, and they sprang to their work with renewed vigor, and a zeal as fresh as if it were but the beginning and not the end.the time wore on, however, and there was no demonstration below, though hour after hour it was expected and even hoped for. just as the sun sank into a bed of blue cloud a horseman was seen coming up the darkened mountain from the eastward side, and in a little while practised eyes reported him one of their own men -- the sergeant who had been sent back the day before for ammunition. he was alone, and had something white before him on his horse -- it could not be the ammunition; but perhaps that might be coming on behind. every step of his jaded horse was anxiously watched. as he drew near, the lieutenant, after a word with the colonel, walked down to meet him, and there was a short colloquy in the muddy road; then they came back together and slowly entered the camp, the sergeant handing down a bag of corn which he had got somewhere below, with the grim remark to his comrades, "there's your rations," and going at once to the colonel's camp-fire, a little to one side among the trees, where the colonel awaited him. a long conference was held, and then the sergeant left to take his luck with his mess, who were already parching the corn he had brought for their supper, while the lieutenant made the round of the camp; leaving the colonel seated alone on a log by his camp-fire. he sat without moving, hardly stirring until the lieutenant returned from his round. a minute later the men were called from the guns and made to fall into line. they were silent, tremulous with suppressed excitement; the most sun-burned and weather-stained of them a little pale; the meanest, raggedest, and most insignificant not unimpressive in the deep and solemn silence with which they stood, their eyes fastened on the colonel, waiting for him to speak. he stepped out in front of them, slowly ran his eye along the irregular line, up and down, taking in every man in his glance, resting on some longer than on others, the older men, then dropped them to the ground, and then suddenly, as if with an effort, began to speak. his voice had a somewhat metallic sound, as if it were restrained; but it was otherwise the ordinary tone of command. it was not much that he said: simply that it had become his duty to acquaint them with the information which he had received: that general lee had surrendered two days before at appomattox court-house, yielding to overwhelming numbers; that this afternoon when he had first heard the report he had questioned its truth, but that it had been confirmed by one of their own men, and no longer admitted of doubt; that the rest of their own force, it was learned, had been captured, or had disbanded, and the enemy was now on both sides of the mountain; that a demand had been made on him that morning to surrender too; but that he had orders which he felt held good until they were countermanded, and he had declined. later intelligence satisfied him that to attempt to hold out further would be useless, and would involve needless waste of life; he had determined, therefore, not to attempt to hold their position longer; but to lead them out, if possible, so as to avoid being made prisoners and enable them to reach home sooner and aid their families. his orders were not to let his guns fall into the enemy's hands, and he should take the only step possible to prevent it. in fifty minutes he should call the battery into line once more, and roll the guns over the cliff into the river, and immediately afterwards, leaving the wagons there, he would try to lead them across the mountain, and as far as they could go in a body without being liable to capture, and then he should disband them, and his responsibility for them would end. as it was necessary to make some preparations he would now dismiss them to prepare any rations they might have and get ready to march.all this was in the formal manner of a common order of the day; and the old colonel had spoken in measured sentences, with little feeling in his voice. not a man in the line had uttered a word after the first sound, half exclamation, half groan, which had burst from them at the announcement of lee's surrender. after that they had stood in their tracks like rooted trees, as motionless as those on the mountain behind them, their eyes fixed on their commander, and only the quick heaving up and down the dark line, as of horses over-laboring, told of the emotion which was shaking them. the colonel, as he ended, half-turned to his subordinate officer at the end of the dim line, as though he were about to turn the company over to him to be dismissed; then faced the line again, and taking a step nearer, with a sudden movement of his hands towards the men as though he would have stretched them out to them, began again:"men," he said, and his voice changed at the word, and sounded like a father's or a brother's, "my men, i cannot let you go so. we were neighbors when the war began -- many of us, and some not here to-night; we have been more since then -- comrades, brothers in arms; we have all stood for one thing -- for virginia and the south; we have all done our duty -- tried to do our duty; we have fought a good fight, and now it seems to be over, and we have been overwhelmed by numbers, not whipped -- and we are going home. we have the future before us -- we don't know just what it will bring, but we can stand a good deal. we have proved it. upon us depends the south in the future as in the past. you have done your duty in the past, you will not fail in the future. go home and be honest, brave, self-sacrificing, god-fearing citizens, as you have been soldiers, and you need not fear for virginia and the south. the war may be over; but you will ever be ready to serve your country. the end may not be as we wanted it, prayed for it, fought for it; but we can trust god; the end in the end will be the best that could be; even if the south is not free she will be better and stronger that she fought as she did. go home and bring up your children to love her, and though you may have nothing else to leave them, you can leave them the heritage that they are sons of men who were in lee's army."he stopped, looked up and down the ranks again, which had instinctively crowded together and drawn around him in a half-circle; made a sign to the lieutenant to take charge, and turned abruptly on his heel to walk away. but as he did so, the long pent-up emotion burst forth. with a wild cheer the men seized him, crowding around and hugging him, as with protestations, prayers, sobs, oaths -- broken, incoherent, inarticulate -- they swore to be faithful, to live loyal forever to the south, to him, to lee. many of them cried like children; others offered to go down and have one more battle on the plain. the old colonel soothed them, and quieted their excitement, and then gave a command about the preparations to be made. this called them to order at once; and in a few minutes the camp was as orderly and quiet as usual: the fires were replenished; the scanty stores were being overhauled; the place was selected, and being got ready to roll the guns over the cliff; the camp was being ransacked for such articles as could be carried, and all preparations were being hastily made for their march.the old colonel having completed his arrangements sat down by his camp-fire with paper and pencil, and began to write; and as the men finished their work they gathered about in groups, at first around their camp-fires, but shortly strolled over to where the guns still stood at the breastwork, black and vague in the darkness. soon they were all assembled about the guns. one after another they visited, closing around it and handling it from muzzle to trail as a man might a horse to try its sinew and bone, or a child to feel its fineness and warmth. they were for the most part silent, and when any sound came through the dusk from them to the officers at their fire, it was murmurous and fitful as of men speaking low and brokenly. there was no sound of the noisy controversy which was generally heard, the give-and-take of the camp-fire, the firing backwards and forwards that went on on the march; if a compliment was paid a gun by one of its special detachment, it was accepted by the others; in fact, those who had generally run it down now seemed most anxious to accord the piece praise. presently a small number of the men returned to a camp-fire, and, building it up, seated themselves about it, gathering closer and closer together until they were in a little knot. one of them appeared to be writing, while two or three took up flaming chunks from the fire and held them as torches for him to see by. in time the entire company assembled about them, standing in respectful silence, broken only occasionally by a reply from one or another to some question from the scribe. after a little there was a sound of a roll-call, and reading and a short colloquy followed, and then two men, one with a paper in his hand, approached the fire beside which the officers sat still engaged."what is it, harris?" said the colonel to the man with the paper, who bore remnants of the chevrons of a sergeant on his stained and faded jacket."if you please, sir," he said, with a salute, "we have been talking it over, and we'd like this paper to go in along with that you're writing." he held it out to the lieutenant, who was the nearer and had reached forward to take it. "we s'pose you're agoin' to bury it with the guns," he said, hesitatingly, as he handed it over."what is it?" asked the colonel, shading his eyes with his hands."it's just a little list we made out in and among us," he said, "with a few things we'd like to put in, so's if anyone ever hauls 'em out they'll find it there to tell what the old battery was, and if they don't, it'll be in one of 'em down thar 'til judgment, an' it'll sort of ease our minds a bit." he stopped and waited as a man who had delivered his message. the old colonel had risen and taken the paper, and now held it with a firm grasp, as if it might blow away with the rising wind. he did not say a word, but his hand shook a little as he proceeded to fold it carefully, and there was a burning gleam in his deep-set eyes, back under his bushy, gray brows."will you sort of look over it, sir, if you think it's worth while? we was in a sort of hurry and we had to put it down just as we come to it; we didn't have time to pick our ammunition; and it ain't written the best in the world, nohow." he waited again, and the colonel opened the paper and glanced down at it mechanically. it contained first a roster, headed by the list of six guns, named by name: "matthew", "mark", "luke", and "john", "the eagle", and "the cat"; then of the men, beginning with the heading:"those killed".then had followed "those wounded", but this was marked out. then came a roster of the company when it first entered service; then of those who had joined afterward; then of those who were present now. at the end of all there was this statement, not very well written, nor wholly accurately spelt:"to whom it may concern: we, the above members of the old battery known, etc., of six guns, named, etc., commanded by the said col. etc., left on the 11th day of april, 1865, have made out this roll of the battery, them as is gone and them as is left, to bury with the guns which the same we bury this night. we're all volunteers, every man; we joined the army at the beginning of the war, and we've stuck through to the end; sometimes we aint had much to eat, and sometimes we aint had nothin', but we've fought the best we could 119 battles and skirmishes as near as we can make out in four years, and never lost a gun. now we're agoin' home. we aint surrendered; just disbanded, and we pledges ourselves to teach our children to love the south and general lee; and to come when we're called anywheres an' anytime, so help us god."there was a dead silence whilst the colonel read."'taint entirely accurite, sir, in one particular," said the sergeant, apologetically; "but we thought it would be playin' it sort o' low down on the cat if we was to say we lost her unless we could tell about gittin' of her back, and the way she done since, and we didn't have time to do all that." he looked around as if to receive the corroboration of the other men, which they signified by nods and shuffling.the colonel said it was all right, and the paper should go into the guns."if you please, sir, the guns are all loaded," said the sergeant; "in and about our last charge, too; and we'd like to fire 'em off once more, jist for old times' sake to remember 'em by, if you don't think no harm could come of it?"the colonel reflected a moment and said it might be done; they might fire each gun separately as they rolled it over, or might get all ready and fire together, and then roll them over, whichever they wished. this was satisfactory.the men were then ordered to prepare to march immediately, and withdrew for the purpose. the pickets were called in. in a short time they were ready, horses and all, just as they would have been to march ordinarily, except that the wagons and caissons were packed over in one corner by the camp with the harness hung on poles beside them, and the guns stood in their old places at the breastwork ready to defend the pass. the embers of the sinking camp-fires threw a faint light on them standing so still and silent. the old colonel took his place, and at a command from him in a somewhat low voice, the men, except a detail left to hold the horses, moved into company-front facing the guns. not a word was spoken, except the words of command. at the order each detachment went to its gun; the guns were run back and the men with their own hands ran them up on the edge of the perpendicular bluff above the river, where, sheer below, its waters washed its base, as if to face an enemy on the black mountain the other side. the pieces stood ranged in the order in which they had so often stood in battle, and the gray, thin fog rising slowly and silently from the river deep down between the cliffs, and wreathing the mountain-side above, might have been the smoke from some unearthly battle fought in the dim pass by ghostly guns, yet posted there in the darkness, manned by phantom gunners, while phantom horses stood behind, lit vaguely up by phantom camp-fires. at the given word the laniard were pulled together, and together as one the six black guns, belching flame and lead, roared their last challenge on the misty night, sending a deadly hail of shot and shell, tearing the trees and splintering the rocks of the farther side, and sending the thunder reverberating through the pass and down the mountain, startling from its slumber the sleeping camp on the hills below, and driving the browsing deer and the prowling mountain-fox in terror up the mountain.there was silence among the men about the guns for one brief instant and then such a cheer burst forth as had never broken from them even in battle: cheer on cheer, the long, wild, old familiar rebel yell for the guns they had fought with and loved.the noise had not died away and the men behind were still trying to quiet the frightened horses when the sergeant, the same who had written, received from the hand of the colonel a long package or roll which contained the records of the battery furnished by the men and by the colonel himself, securely wrapped to make them water-tight, and it was rammed down the yet warm throat of the nearest gun: the cat, and then the gun was tamped to the muzzle to make her water-tight, and, like her sisters, was spiked, and her vent tamped tight. all this took but a minute, and the next instant the guns were run up once more to the edge of the cliff; and the men stood by them with their hands still on them. a deadly silence fell on the men, and even the horses behind seemed to feel the spell. there was a long pause, in which not a breath was heard from any man, and the soughing of the tree-tops above and the rushing of the rapids below were the only sounds. they seemed to come from far, very far away. then the colonel said, quietly, "let them go, and god be our helper, amen." there was the noise in the darkness of trampling and scraping on the cliff-top for a second; the sound as of men straining hard together, and then with a pant it ceased all at once, and the men held their breath to hear. one second of utter silence; then one prolonged, deep, resounding splash sending up a great mass of white foam as the brass-pieces together plunged into the dark water below, and then the soughing of the trees and the murmur of the river came again with painful distinctness. it was full ten minutes before the colonel spoke, though there were other sounds enough in the darkness, and some of the men, as the dark, outstretched bodies showed, were lying on the ground flat on their faces. then the colonel gave the command to fall in in the same quiet, grave tone he had used all night. the line fell in, the men getting to their horses and mounting in silence; the colonel put himself at their head and gave the order of march, and the dark line turned in the darkness, crossed the little plateau between the smouldering camp-fires and the spectral caissons with the harness hanging beside them, and slowly entered the dim charcoal-burner's track. not a word was spoken as they moved off. they might all have been phantoms. only, the sergeant in the rear, as he crossed the little breastwork which ran along the upper side and marked the boundary of the little camp, half turned and glanced at the dying fires, the low, newly made mounds in the corner, the abandoned caissons, and the empty redoubt, and said, slowly, in a low voice to himself,"well, by god!"please, god, let him telephone me now. dear god, let him call me now. i won't ask anything else of you, truly i won't. it isn't very much to ask. it would be so little to you, god, such a little, little thing. only let him telephone now. please, god. please,  please, please.if i didn't think about it, maybe the telephone might ring. sometimes it does that. if i could think of something else. if i could think of something else. knobby if i counted five hundred by fives, it might ring by that time. i'll count slowly. i won't cheat. and if it rings when i get to three hundred, i won't stop; i won't answer it until i get to five hundred. five, ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five, fifty.... oh, please ring. please.this is the last time i'll look at the clock. i will not look at it again. it's ten minutes past seven. he said he would telephone at five o'clock. "i'll call you at five, darling." i think that's where he said "darling." i'm almost sure he said it there. i know he called me "darling" twice, and the other time was when he said good-by. "good-by, darling." he was busy, and he can't say much in the office, but he called me "darling" twice. he couldn't have minded my calling him up. i know you shouldn't keep telephoning them--i know they don't like that. when you do that they know you are thinking about them and wanting them, and that makes them hate you. but i hadn't talked to him in three days-not in three days. and all i did was ask him how he was; it was just the way anybody might have called him up. he couldn't have minded that. he couldn't have thought i was bothering him. "no, of course you're not," he said. and he said he'd telephone me. he didn't have to say that. i didn't ask him to, truly i didn't. i'm sure i didn't. i don't think he would say he'd telephone me, and then just never do it. please don't let him do that, god. please don't."i'll call you at five, darling." "good-by, darling.,' he was busy, and he was in a hurry, and there were people around him, but he called me "darling" twice. that's mine, that's mine. i have that, even if i never see him again. oh, but that's so little. that isn't enough. nothing's enough, if i never see him again. please let me see him again, god. please, i want him so much. i want him so much. i'll be good, god. i will try to be better, i will, if you will let me see him again. if you will let him telephone me. oh, let him telephone me now.ah, don't let my prayer seem too  little to you, god. you sit up there, so  white and old, with all the angels  about you and the stars slipping by. and i come to you with a prayer about  a telephone call. ah, don't laugh, god.  you see, you don't know how it feels.  you're so safe, there on your throne,  with the blue swirling under you.  nothing can touch you; no one can  twist your heart in his hands. this is  suffering, god, this is bad, bad  suffering. won't you help me? for  your son's sake, help me. you said  you would do whatever was asked of  you in his name. oh, god, in the  name of thine only beloved son, jesus  christ, our lord, let him telephone me  now.i must stop this. i mustn't be this  way. look. suppose a young man says  he'll call a girl up, and then something  happens, and he doesn't. that isn't so  terrible, is it? why, it's gong on all  over the world, right this minute. oh,  what do i care what's going on all over  the world? why can't that telephone  ring? why can't it, why can't it?  couldn't you ring? ah, please, couldn't  you? you damned, ugly, shiny thing. it  would hurt you to ring, wouldn't it?  oh, that would hurt you. damn you,  i'll pull your filthy roots out of the  wall, i'll smash your smug black face  in little bits. damn you to hell.no, no, no. i must stop. i must think  about something else. this is what i'll  do. i'll put the clock in the other room.  then i can't look at it. if i do have to  look at it, then i'll have to walk into  the bedroom, and that will be  something to do. maybe, before i look  at it again, he will call me. i'll be so  sweet to him, if he calls me. if he says  he can't see me tonight, i'll say, "why, that's all  right, dear. why, of course it's all  right." i'll be the way i was when i first  met him. then maybe he'll like me  again. i was always sweet, at first. oh,  it's so easy to be sweet to people  before you love them.i think he must still like me a little.  he couldn't have called me "darling"  twice today, if he didn't still like me a  little. it isn't all gone, if he still likes  me a little; even if it's only a little,  little bit. you see, god, if you would  just let him telephone me, i wouldn't  have to ask you anything more. i  would be sweet to him, i would be  gay, i would be just the way i used to  be, and then he would love me again.  and then i would never have to ask  you for anything more. don't you  see, god? so won't you please let him  telephone me? won't you please,  please, please?are you punishing me, god,  because i've been bad? are you angry  with me because i did that? oh, but,  god, there are so many bad people  --you could not be hard only to me.  and it wasn't very bad; it couldn't have  been bad. we didn't hurt anybody,  god. things are only bad when they  hurt people. we didn't hurt one single  soul; you know that. you know it  wasn't bad, don't you, god? so won't  you let him telephone me now?if he doesn't telephone me, i'll know  god is angry with me. i'll count five  hundred by fives, and if he hasn't  called me then, i will know god isn't  going to help me, ever again. that will  be the sign. five, ten, fifteen, twenty,  twenty-five, thirty, thirty-five, forty,  forty-five, fifty, fifty-five. . . it was  bad. i knew it was bad. all right, god,  send me to hell. you think you're  frightening me with your hell, don't  you? you think. your hell is worse than mine.i mustn't. i mustn't do this. suppose  he's a little late calling me up --that's  nothing to get hysterical about. maybe  he isn't going to call--maybe he's  coming straight up here without  telephoning. he'll be cross if he sees i  have been crying. they don't like you  to cry. he doesn't cry. i wish to god i  could make him cry. i wish i could  make him cry and tread the floor and  feel his heart heavy and big and  festering in him. i wish i could hurt  him like hell.he doesn't wish that about me. i  don't think he even knows how he  makes me feel. i wish he could know,  without my telling him. they don't like  you to tell them they've made you cry.  they don't like you to tell them you're  unhappy because of them. if you do,  they think you're possessive and  exacting. and then they hate you. they  hate you whenever you say anything  you really think. you always have to  keep playing little games. oh, i  thought we didn't have to; i thought  this was so big i could say whatever i  meant. i guess you can't, ever. i guess  there isn't ever anything big enough for  that. oh, if he would just telephone, i  wouldn't tell him i had been sad about  him. they hate sad people. i would be  so sweet and so gay, he couldn't help  but like me. if he would only  telephone. if he would only telephone.maybe that's what he is doing.  maybe he is coming on here without  calling me up. maybe he's on his way  now. something might have happened  to him. no, nothing could ever happen  to him. i can't picture anything  happening to him. i never picture him  run over. i never see him lying still  and long and dead. i wish he were  dead. that's a terrible wish. that's a  lovely wish. if he were dead, he would be mine. if he were  dead, i would never think of now and  the last few weeks. i would remember  only the lovely times. it would be all  beautiful. i wish he were dead. i wish  he were dead, dead, dead.this is silly. it's silly to go wishing  people were dead just because they  don't call you up the very minute they  said they would. maybe the clock's  fast; i don't know whether it's right.  maybe he's hardly late at all. anything  could have made him a little late.  maybe he had to stay at his office.  maybe he went home, to call me up  from there, and somebody came in. he  doesn't like to telephone me in front of  people. maybe he's worried, just  alittle, little bit, about keeping me  waiting. he might even hope that i  would call him up. i could do that. i  could telephone him.i mustn't. i mustn't, i mustn't. oh,  god, please don't let me telephone  him. please keep me from doing that. i  know, god, just as well as you do,  that if he were worried about me, he'd  telephone no matter where he was or  how many people there were around  him. please make me know that, god.  i don't ask you to make it easy for  me--you can't do that, for all that you  could make a world. only let me know  it, god. don't let me go on hoping.  don't let me say comforting things to  myself. please don't let me hope, dear  god. please don't.i won't telephone him. i'll never  telephone him again as long as i live.  he'll rot in hell, before i'll call him up.  you don't have to give me strength,  god; i have it myself. if he wanted me,  he could get me. he knows where i  ram. he knows i'm waiting here. he's  so sure of me, so sure. i wonder why  they hate you, as soon as they are sure of you. i  should think it would be so sweet to  be sure.it would be so easy to telephone  him. then i'd know. maybe it wouldn't  be a foolish thing to do. maybe he  wouldn't mind. maybe he'd like it.  maybe he has been trying to get me.  sometimes people try and try to get  you on the telephone, and they say the  number doesn't answer. i'm not just  saying that to help myself; that really  happens. you know that really  happens, god. oh, god, keep me away  from that telephone. kcep me away.  let me still have just a little bit of  pride. i think i'm going to need it, god.  i think it will be all i'll have.oh, what does pride matter, when i  can't stand it if i don't talk to him?  pride like that is such a silly, shabby  little thing. the real pride, the big  pride, is in having no pride. i'm not  saying that just because i want to call  him. i am not. that's true, i know that's  true. i will be big. i will be beyond  little prides.please, god, keep me from,  telephoning him. please, god.i don't see what pride has to do with  it. this is such a little thing, for me to  be bringing in pride, for me to be  making such a fuss about. i may have  misunderstood him. maybe he said for  me to call him up, at five. "call me at  five, darling." he could have said that,  perfectly well. it's so possible that i  didn't hear him right. "call me at five,  darling." i'm almost sure that's what he  said. god, don't let me talk this way to  myself. make me know, please make  me know.i'll think about something else. i'll  just sit quietly. if i could sit still. if i  could sit still. maybe i could read. oh,  all the books are about people who  love each other, truly and sweetly.  what do they want to write about that  for? don't they know it isn't tree?  don't they know it's a lie, it's a god  damned lie? what do they have to tell  about that for, when they know how it  hurts? damn them, damn them, damn  them.i won't. i'll be quiet. this is nothing  to get excited about. look. suppose he  were someone i didn't know very well.  suppose he were another girl. then i d  just telephone and say, "well, for  goodness' sake, what happened to  you?" that's what i'd do, and i'd never  even think about it. why can't i be  casual and natural, just because i love  him? i can be. honestly, i can be. i'll  call him up, and be so easy and  pleasant. you see if i won't, god. oh,  don't let me call him. don't, don't,  don't.god, aren't you really going to let  him call me? are you sure, god?  couldn't you please relent? couldn't  you? i don't even ask you to let him  telephone me this minute, god; only  let him do it in a little while. i'll count  five hundred by fives. i'll do it so  slowly and so fairly. if he hasn't  telephoned then, i'll call him. i will.  oh, please, dear god, dear kind god,  my blessed father in heaven, let him  call before then. please, god. please.five, ten, fifteen, twenty,  twentyfive, thirty, thirty-five.for the most wild, yet most homely narrative which i am about to pen, i neither expect nor solicit belief. mad indeed would i be to expect it, in a case where my very senses reject their own evidence. yet, mad am i not - and very surely do i not dream. but to-morrow i die, and to-day i would unburthen my soul. my immediate purpose is to place before the world, plainly, succinctly, and without comment, a series of mere household events. in their consequences, these events have terrified - have tortured - have destroyed me. yet i will not attempt to expound them. to me, they have presented little but horror - to many they will seem less terrible than barroques. hereafter, perhaps, some intellect may be found which will reduce my phantasm to the common-place - some intellect more calm, more logical, and far less excitable than my own, which will perceive, in the circumstances i detail with awe, nothing more than an ordinary succession of very natural causes and effects.from my infancy i was noted for the docility and humanity of my disposition. my tenderness of heart was even so conspicuous as to make me the jest of my companions. i was especially fond of animals, and was indulged by my parents with a great variety of pets. with these i spent most of my time, and never was so happy as when feeding and caressing them. this peculiarity of character grew with my growth, and in my manhood, i derived from it one of my principal sources of pleasure. to those who have cherished an affection for a faithful and sagacious dog, i need hardly be at the trouble of explaining the nature or the intensity of the gratification thus derivable. there is something in the unselfish and self-sacrificing love of a brute, which goes directly to the heart of him who has had frequent occasion to test the paltry friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere man.i married early, and was happy to find in my wife a disposition not uncongenial with my own. observing my partiality for domestic pets, she lost no opportunity of procuring those of the most agreeable kind. we had birds, gold-fish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small monkey, and a cat.this latter was a remarkably large and beautiful animal, entirely black, and sagacious to an astonishing degree. in speaking of his intelligence, my wife, who at heart was not a little tinctured with superstition, made frequent allusion to the ancient popular notion, which regarded all black cats as witches in disguise. not that she was ever serious upon this point - and i mention the matter at all for no better reason than that it happens, just now, to be remembered.pluto - this was the cat's name - was my favorite pet and playmate. i alone fed him, and he attended me wherever i went about the house. it was even with difficulty that i could prevent him from following me through the streets.our friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, during which my general temperament and character - through the instrumentality of the fiend intemperance - had (i blush to confess it) experienced a radical alteration for the worse. i grew, day by day, more moody, more irritable, more regardless of the feelings of others. i suffered myself to use intemperate language to my wife. at length, i even offered her personal violence. my pets, of course, were made to feel the change in my disposition. i not only neglected, but ill-used them. for pluto, however, i still retained sufficient regard to restrain me from maltreating him, as i made no scruple of maltreating the rabbits, the monkey, or even the dog, when by accident, or through affection, they came in my way. but my disease grew upon me - for what disease is like alcohol! - and at length even pluto, who was now becoming old, and consequently somewhat peevish - even pluto began to experience the effects of my ill temper.one night, returning home, much intoxicated, from one of my haunts about town, i fancied that the cat avoided my presence. i seized him; when, in his fright at my violence, he inflicted a slight wound upon my hand with his teeth. the fury of a demon instantly possessed me. i knew myself no longer. my original soul seemed, at once, to take its flight from my body and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrilled every fibre of my frame. i took from my waistcoat-pocket a pen-knife, opened it, grasped the poor beast by the throat, and deliberately cut one of its eyes from the socket! i blush, i burn, i shudder, while i pen the damnable atrocity.when reason returned with the morning - when i had slept off the fumes of the night's debauch - i experienced a sentiment half of horror, half of remorse, for the crime of which i had been guilty; but it was, at best, a feeble and equivocal feeling, and the soul remained untouched. i again plunged into excess, and soon drowned in wine all memory of the deed.in the meantime the cat slowly recovered. the socket of the lost eye presented, it is true, a frightful appearance, but he no longer appeared to suffer any pain. he went about the house as usual, but, as might be expected, fled in extreme terror at my approach. i had so much of my old heart left, as to be at first grieved by this evident dislike on the part of a creature which had once so loved me. but this feeling soon gave place to irritation. and then came, as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow, the spirit of perverseness. of this spirit philosophy takes no account. yet i am not more sure that my soul lives, than i am that perverseness is one of the primitive impulses of the human heart - one of the indivisible primary faculties, or sentiments, which give direction to the character of man. who has not, a hundred times, found himself committing a vile or a silly action, for no other reason than because he knows he should not? have we not a perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to violate that which is law , merely because we understand it to be such? this spirit of perverseness, i say, came to my final overthrow. it was this unfathomable longing of the soul to vex itself - to offer violence to its own nature - to do wrong for the wrong's sake only - that urged me to continue and finally to consummate the injury i had inflicted upon the unoffending brute. one morning, in cool blood, i slipped a noose about its neck and hung it to the limb of a tree; - hung it with the tears streaming from my eyes, and with the bitterest remorse at my heart; - hung it because i knew that it had loved me, and because i felt it had given me no reason of offence; - hung it because i knew that in so doing i was committing a sin - a deadly sin that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to place it - if such a thing wore possible - even beyond the reach of the infinite mercy of the most merciful and most terrible god.on the night of the day on which this cruel deed was done, i was aroused from sleep by the cry of fire. the curtains of my bed were in flames. the whole house was blazing. it was with great difficulty that my wife, a servant, and myself, made our escape from the conflagration. the destruction was complete. my entire worldly wealth was swallowed up, and i resigned myself thenceforward to despair.i am above the weakness of seeking to establish a sequence of cause and effect, between the disaster and the atrocity. but i am detailing a chain of facts - and wish not to leave even a possible link imperfect. on the day succeeding the fire, i visited the ruins. the walls, with one exception, had fallen in. this exception was found in a compartment wall, not very thick, which stood about the middle of the house, and against which had rested the head of my bed. the plastering had here, in great measure, resisted the action of the fire - a fact which i attributed to its having been recently spread. about this wall a dense crowd were collected, and many persons seemed to be examining a particular portion of it with very minute and eager attention. the words "strange!" "singular!" and other similar expressions, excited my curiosity. i approached and saw, as if graven in bas relief upon the white surface, the figure of a gigantic cat. the impression was given with an accuracy truly marvellous. there was a rope about the animal's neck.when i first beheld this apparition - for i could scarcely regard it as less - my wonder and my terror were extreme. but at length reflection came to my aid. the cat, i remembered, had been hung in a garden adjacent to the house. upon the alarm of fire, this garden had been immediately filled by the crowd - by some one of whom the animal must have been cut from the tree and thrown, through an open window, into my chamber. this had probably been done with the view of arousing me from sleep. the falling of other walls had compressed the victim of my cruelty into the substance of the freshly-spread plaster; the lime of which, with the flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, had then accomplished the portraiture as i saw it.although i thus readily accounted to my reason, if not altogether to my conscience, for the startling fact just detailed, it did not the less fail to make a deep impression upon my fancy. for months i could not rid myself of the phantasm of the cat; and, during this period, there came back into my spirit a half-sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. i went so far as to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the vile haunts which i now habitually frequented, for another pet of the same species, and of somewhat similar appearance, with which to supply its place.one night as i sat, half stupified, in a den of more than infamy, my attention was suddenly drawn to some black object, reposing upon the head of one of the immense hogsheads of gin, or of rum, which constituted the chief furniture of the apartment. i had been looking steadily at the top of this hogshead for some minutes, and what now caused me surprise was the fact that i had not sooner perceived the object thereupon. i approached it, and touched it with my hand. it was a black cat - a very large one - fully as large as pluto, and closely resembling him in every respect but one. pluto had not a white hair upon any portion of his body; but this cat had a large, although indefinite splotch of white, covering nearly the whole region of the breast. upon my touching him, he immediately arose, purred loudly, rubbed against my hand, and appeared delighted with my notice. this, then, was the very creature of which i was in search. i at once offered to purchase it off the landlord; but this person made no claim to it - knew nothing of it - had never seen it before.i continued my caresses, and, when i prepared to go home, the animal evinced a disposition to accompany me. i permitted it to do so; occasionally stooping and patting it as i proceeded. when it reached the house it domesticated itself at once, and became immediately a great favorite with my wife.for my own part, i soon found a dislike to it arising within me. this was just the reverse of what i had anticipated; but - i know not how or why it was - its evident fondness for myself rather disgusted and annoyed. by slow degrees, these feelings of disgust and annoyance rose into the bitterness of hatred. i avoided the creature; a certain sense of shame, and the remembrance of my former deed of cruelty, preventing me from physically abusing it. i did not, for some weeks, strike, or otherwise violently ill use it; but gradually - very gradually - i came to look upon it with unutterable loathing, and to flee silently from its odious presence, as from the breath of a pestilence.what added, no doubt, to my hatred of the beast, was the discovery, on the morning after i brought it home, that, like pluto, it also had been deprived of one of its eyes. this circumstance, however, only endeared it to my wife, who, as i have already said, possessed, in a high degree, that humanity of feeling which had once been my distinguishing trait, and the source of many of my simplest and purest pleasures.with my aversion to this cat, however, its partiality for myself seemed to increase. it followed my footsteps with a pertinacity which it would be difficult to make the reader comprehend. whenever i sat, it would crouch beneath my chair, or spring upon my knees, covering me with its loathsome caresses. if i arose to walk it would get between my feet and thus nearly throw me down, or, fastening its long and sharp claws in my dress, clamber, in this manner, to my breast. at such times, although i longed to destroy it with a blow, i was yet withheld from so doing, partly by a memory of my former crime, but chiefly - let me confess it at once - by absolute dread of the beast.this dread was not exactly a dread of physical evil - and yet i should be at a loss how otherwise to define it. i am almost ashamed to own - yes, even in this felon's cell, i am almost ashamed to own - that the terror and horror with which the animal inspired me, had been heightened by one of the merest chimaeras it would be possible to conceive. my wife had called my attention, more than once, to the character of the mark of white hair, of which i have spoken, and which constituted the sole visible difference between the strange beast and the one i had destroyed. the reader will remember that this mark, although large, had been originally very indefinite; but, by slow degrees - degrees nearly imperceptible, and which for a long time my reason struggled to reject as fanciful - it had, at length, assumed a rigorous distinctness of outline. it was now the representation of an object that i shudder to name - and for this, above all, i loathed, and dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had i dared - it was now, i say, the image of a hideous - of a ghastly thing - of the gallows ! - oh, mournful and terrible engine of horror and of crime - of agony and of death !and now was i indeed wretched beyond the wretchedness of mere humanity. and a brute beast - whose fellow i had contemptuously destroyed - a brute beast to work out for me - for me a man, fashioned in the image of the high god - so much of insufferable wo! alas! neither by day nor by night knew i the blessing of rest any more! during the former the creature left me no moment alone; and, in the latter, i started, hourly, from dreams of unutterable fear, to find the hot breath of the thing upon my face, and its vast weight - an incarnate night-mare that i had no power to shake off - incumbent eternally upon my heart!beneath the pressure of torments such as these, the feeble remnant of the good within me succumbed. evil thoughts became my sole intimates - the darkest and most evil of thoughts. the moodiness of my usual temper increased to hatred of all things and of all mankind; while, from the sudden, frequent, and ungovernable outbursts of a fury to which i now blindly abandoned myself, my uncomplaining wife, alas! was the most usual and the most patient of sufferers.one day she accompanied me, upon some household errand, into the cellar of the old building which our poverty compelled us to inhabit. the cat followed me down the steep stairs, and, nearly throwing me headlong, exasperated me to madness. uplifting an axe, and forgetting, in my wrath, the childish dread which had hitherto stayed my hand, i aimed a blow at the animal which, of course, would have proved instantly fatal had it descended as i wished. but this blow was arrested by the hand of my wife. goaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal, i withdrew my arm from her grasp and buried the axe in her brain. she fell dead upon the spot, without a groan.this hideous murder accomplished, i set myself forthwith, and with entire deliberation, to the task of concealing the body. i knew that i could not remove it from the house, either by day or by night, without the risk of being observed by the neighbors. many projects entered my mind. at one period i thought of cutting the corpse into minute fragments, and destroying them by fire. at another, i resolved to dig a grave for it in the floor of the cellar. again, i deliberated about casting it in the well in the yard - about packing it in a box, as if merchandize, with the usual arrangements, and so getting a porter to take it from the house. finally i hit upon what i considered a far better expedient than either of these. i determined to wall it up in the cellar - as the monks of the middle ages are recorded to have walled up their victims.for a purpose such as this the cellar was well adapted. its walls were loosely constructed, and had lately been plastered throughout with a rough plaster, which the dampness of the atmosphere had prevented from hardening. moreover, in one of the walls was a projection, caused by a false chimney, or fireplace, that had been filled up, and made to resemble the red of the cellar. i made no doubt that i could readily displace the bricks at this point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole up as before, so that no eye could detect any thing suspicious. and in this calculation i was not deceived. by means of a crow-bar i easily dislodged the bricks, and, having carefully deposited the body against the inner wall, i propped it in that position, while, with little trouble, i re-laid the whole structure as it originally stood. having procured mortar, sand, and hair, with every possible precaution, i prepared a plaster which could not be distinguished from the old, and with this i very carefully went over the new brickwork. when i had finished, i felt satisfied that all was right. the wall did not present the slightest appearance of having been disturbed. the rubbish on the floor was picked up with the minutest care. i looked around triumphantly, and said to myself - "here at least, then, my labor has not been in vain."my next step was to look for the beast which had been the cause of so much wretchedness; for i had, at length, firmly resolved to put it to death. had i been able to meet with it, at the moment, there could have been no doubt of its fate; but it appeared that the crafty animal had been alarmed at the violence of my previous anger, and forebore to present itself in my present mood. it is impossible to describe, or to imagine, the deep, the blissful sense of relief which the absence of the detested creature occasioned in my bosom. it did not make its appearance during the night - and thus for one night at least, since its introduction into the house, i soundly and tranquilly slept; aye, slept even with the burden of murder upon my soul!the second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor came not. once again i breathed as a freeman. the monster, in terror, had fled the premises forever! i should behold it no more! my happiness was supreme! the guilt of my dark deed disturbed me but little. some few inquiries had been made, but these had been readily answered. even a search had been instituted - but of course nothing was to be discovered. i looked upon my future felicity as secured.upon the fourth day of the assassination, a party of the police came, very unexpectedly, into the house, and proceeded again to make rigorous investigation of the premises. secure, however, in the inscrutability of my place of concealment, i felt no embarrassment whatever. the officers bade me accompany them in their search. they left no nook or corner unexplored. at length, for the third or fourth time, they descended into the cellar. i quivered not in a muscle. my heart beat calmly as that of one who slumbers in innocence. i walked the cellar from end to end. i folded my arms upon my bosom, and roamed easily to and fro. the police were thoroughly satisfied and prepared to depart. the glee at my heart was too strong to be restrained. i burned to say if but one word, by way of triumph, and to render doubly sure their assurance of my guiltlessness."gentlemen," i said at last, as the party ascended the steps, "i delight to have allayed your suspicions. i wish you all health, and a little more courtesy. by the bye, gentlemen, this - this is a very well constructed house." [in the rabid desire to say something easily, i scarcely knew what i uttered at all.] - "i may say an excellently well constructed house. these walls are you going, gentlemen? - these walls are solidly put together;" and here, through the mere phrenzy of bravado, i rapped heavily, with a cane which i held in my hand, upon that very portion of the brick-work behind which stood the corpse of the wife of my bosom.but may god shield and deliver me from the fangs of the arch-fiend! no sooner had the reverberation of my blows sunk into silence, than i was answered by a voice from within the tomb! - by a cry, at first muffled and broken, like the sobbing of a child, and then quickly swelling into one long, loud, and continuous scream, utterly anomalous and inhuman - a howl - a wailing shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as might have arisen only out of hell, conjointly from the throats of the dammed in their agony and of the demons that exult in the damnation.of my own thoughts it is folly to speak. swooning, i staggered to the opposite wall. for one instant the party upon the stairs remained motionless, through extremity of terror and of awe. in the next, a dozen stout arms were toiling at the wall. it fell bodily. the corpse, already greatly decayed and clotted with gore, stood erect before the eyes of the spectators. upon its head, with red extended mouth and solitary eye of fire, sat the hideous beast whose craft had seduced me into murder, and whose informing voice had consigned me to the hangman. i had walled the monster up within the tomb!the thousand injuries of fortunato i had borne as i best could; but when he ventured upon insult, i vowed revenge. you, who so well know the nature of my soul, will not suppose, however, that i gave utterance to a threat. at length i would be avenged; this was a point definitely settled--but the very definitiveness with which it was resolved precluded the idea of risk. i must not only punish, but punish with impunity. a wrong is unredressed when retribution overtakes its redresser. it is equally unredressed when the avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done the wrong.it must be understood that neither by word nor deed had i given fortunato cause to doubt my good-will. i continued, as was my wont, to smile in his face, and he did not perceive that my smile now was at the thought of his immolation.he had a weak point--this fortunato--although in other regards he was a man to be respected and even feared. he prided himself on his connoisseurship in wine. few italians have the true virtuoso spirit. for the most part their enthusiasm is adopted to suit the time and opportunity--to practise imposture upon the british and austrian millionaires. in painting and gemmary, fortunato, like his countrymen, was a quack--but in the matter of old wines he was sincere. in this respect i did not differ from him materially: i was skillful in the italian vintages myself, and bought largely whenever i could.it was about dusk, one evening during the supreme madness of the carnival season, that i encountered my friend. he accosted me with excessive warmth, for he had been drinking much. the man wore motley. he had on a tight-fitting party-striped dress, and his head was surmounted by the conical cap and bells. i was so pleased to see him that i thought i should never have done wringing his hand.i said to him: "my dear fortunato, you are luckily met. how remarkably well you are looking to-day! but i have received a pipe of what passes for amontillado, and i have my doubts.""how?" said he. "amontillado? a pipe? impossible! and in the middle of the carnival!""i have my doubts," i replied; "and i was silly enough to pay the full amontillado price without consulting you in the matter. you were not to be found, and i was fearful of losing a bargain.""amontillado!""i have my doubts.""amontillado!""and i must satisfy them.""amontillado!""as you are engaged, i am on my way to luchesi. if any one has a critical turn, it is he. he will tell me-- ""luchesi cannot tell amontillado from sherry.""and yet some fools will have it that his taste is a match for your own.""come, let us go.""whither?""to your vaults.""my friend, no. i will not impose upon your good nature. i perceive you have an engagement. luchesi--""i have no engagement--come.""my friend, no. it is not the engagement, but the severe cold with which i perceive you are afflicted. the vaults are insufferably damp. they are encrusted with nitre.""let us go, nevertheless. the cold is merely nothing. amontillado! you have been imposed upon. and as for luchesi, he cannot distinguish sherry from amontillado."thus speaking, fortunato possessed himself of my arm. putting on a mask of black silk, and drawing a roquelaure closely about my person, i suffered him to hurry me to my palazzo.there were no attendants at home; they had absconded to make merry in honour of the time. i had told them that i should not return until the morning, and had given them explicit orders not to stir from the house. these orders were sufficient, i well knew, to insure their immediate disappearance, one and all, as soon as my back was turned.i took from their sconces two flambeaux, and giving one to fortunato, bowed him through several suites of rooms to the archway that led into the vaults. i passed down a long and winding staircase, requesting him to be cautious as he followed. we came at length to the foot of the descent, and stood together on the damp ground of the catacombs of the montresors.the gait of my friend was unsteady, and the bells upon his cap jingled as he strode."the pipe," said he."it is farther on," said i; "but observe the white webwork which gleams from these cavern walls."he turned towards me, and looked into my eyes with two filmy orbs that distilled the rheum of intoxication."nitre?" he asked, at length."nitre," i replied. "how long have you had that cough?""ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh!"my poor friend found it impossible to reply. for many minutes."it is nothing," he said at last."come," i said, with decision, "we will go back; your health is precious. you are rich, respected, admired, beloved; you are happy, as once i was. you are a man to be missed. for me it is no matter. we will go back; you will be ill, and i cannot be responsible. besides, there is luchesi--""enough," he said: "the cough is a mere nothing; it will not kill me. i shall not die of a cough.""true--true." i replied; "and indeed, i had no intention of alarming you unnecessarily--but you should use all proper caution. a draught of this medoc will defend us from the damps."here i knocked off the neck of a bottle which i drew from a long row of its fellows that lay upon the mould."drink," i said, presenting him the wine.he raised it to his lips with a leer. he paused and nodded to me familiarly, while his bells jingled."i drink," he said, "to the buried that repose around us.""and i to your long life."he again took my arm, and we proceeded."these vaults," he said, "are extensive.""the montresors," i replied, "were a great and numerous family.""i forget your arms.""a huge human foot d'or, in a field azure; the foot crushes a serpent rampant whose fangs are embedded in the heel.""and the motto?""nemo me impune lacessit.""good!" he said.the wine sparkled in his eyes and the bells jingled. my own fancy grew warm with the medoc. we had passed through walls of piled bones, with casks and puncheons intermingling, into the inmost recesses of the catacombs. i paused again, and this time i made bold to seize fortunato by an arm above the elbow."the nitre!" i said; "see, it increases. it hangs like moss upon the vaults. we are below the river's bed. the drops of moisture trickle among the bones. come, we will go back ere it is too late. your cough--""it is nothing," he said; "let us go on. but first, another draught of the medoc."i broke and reached him a flagon of de grã¢ve. he emptied it at a breath. his eyes flashed with a fierce light. he laughed, and threw the bottle upward with a gesticulation i did not understand.i looked at him in surprise. he repeated the movement--a grotesque one."you do not comprehend?" he said."not i," i replied."then you are not of the brotherhood.""how?""you are not of the masons.""yes, yes," i said, "yes, yes.""you? impossible! a mason?""a mason," i replied."a sign," he said."it is this," i answered, producing a trowel from beneath the folds of my roquelaure."you jest," he exclaimed, recoiling a few paces. "but let us proceed to the amontillado.""be it so," i said, replacing the tool beneath the cloak, and again offering him my arm. he leaned upon it heavily. we continued our route in search of the amontillado. we passed through a range of low arches, descended, passed on, and, descending again, arrived at a deep crypt, in which the foulness of the air caused our flambeaux rather to glow than flame.at the most remote end of the crypt there appeared another less spacious. its walls had been lined with human remains, piled to the vault overhead, in the fashion of the great catacombs of paris. three sides of this interior crypt were still ornamented in this manner. from the fourth the bones had been thrown down, and lay promiscuously upon the earth, forming at one point a mound of some size. within the wall thus exposed by the displacing of the bones we perceived a still interior recess, in depth about four feet, in width three, in height six or seven. it seemed to have been constructed for no especial use within itself, but formed merely the interval between two of the colossal supports of the roof of the catacombs, and was backed by one of their circumscribing walls of solid granite.it was in vain that fortunato, uplifting his dull torch, endeavored to pry into the depth of the recess. its termination the feeble light did not enable us to see."proceed," i said; "herein is the amontillado. as for luchesi--""he is an ignoramus," interrupted my friend, as he stepped unsteadily forward, while i followed immediately at his heels. in an instant he had reached the extremity of the niche, and finding his progress arrested by the rock, stood stupidly bewildered. a moment more and i had fettered him to the granite. in its surface were two iron staples, distant from each other about two feet, horizontally. from one of these depended a short chain, from the other a padlock. throwing the links about his waist, it was but the work of a few seconds to secure it. he was too much astounded to resist. withdrawing the key, i stepped back from the recess."pass your hand," i said, "over the wall; you cannot help feeling the nitre. indeed it is very damp. once more let me implore you to return. no? then i must positively leave you. but i must first render you all the little attentions in my power.""the amontillado!" ejaculated my friend, not yet recovered from his astonishment."true," i replied; "the amontillado."as i said these words i busied myself among the pile of bones of which i have before spoken. throwing them aside, i soon uncovered a quantity of building-stone and mortar. with these materials and with the aid of my trowel, i began vigorously to wall up the entrance of the niche.i had scarcely laid the first tier of the masonry when i discovered that the intoxication of fortunato had in a great measure worn off. the earliest indication i had of this was a low moaning cry from the depth of the recess. it was not the cry of a drunken man. there was then a long and obstinate silence. i laid the second tier, and the third, and the fourth; and then i heard the furious vibrations of the chain. the noise lasted for several minutes, during which, that i might hearken to it with the more satisfaction, i ceased my labours and sat down upon the bones. when at last the clanking subsided, i resumed the trowel, and finished without interruption the fifth, the sixth, and the seventh tier. the wall was now nearly upon a level with my breast. i again paused, and holding the flambeaux over the masonwork, threw a few feeble rays upon the figure within.a succession of loud and shrill screams, bursting suddenly from the throat of the chained form, seemed to thrust me violently back. for a brief moment i hesitated--i trembled. unsheathing my rapier, i began to grope with it about the recess; but the thought of an instant reassured me. i placed my hand upon the solid fabric of the catacombs, and felt satisfied. i reapproached the wall. i replied to the yells of him who clamoured. i reã«choed--i aided--i surpassed them in volume and in strength. i did this, and the clamourer grew still.it was now midnight, and my task was drawing to a close. i had completed the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth tier. i had finished a portion of the last and the eleventh; there remained but a single stone to be fitted and plastered in. i struggled with its weight; i placed it partially in its destined position. but now there came from out the niche a low laugh that erected the hairs upon my head. it was succeeded by a sad voice, which i had difficulty in recognising as that of the noble fortunato. the voice said:"ha! ha! ha!--he! he! he!--a very good joke indeed--an excellent jest. we will have many a rich laugh about it at the palazzo--he! he! he!--over our wine--he! he! he!""the amontillado!" i said."he! he! he!--he! he! he!--yes, the amontillado. but is it not getting late? will not they be awaiting us at the palazzo--the lady fortunato and the rest? let us be gone.""yes," i said, "let us be gone.""for the love of god, montresor!""yes," i said, "for the love of god!"but to these words i hearkened in vain for a reply. i grew impatient. i called aloud:"fortunato!"no answer. i called again:"fortunato!"no answer still. i thrust a torch through the remaining aperture and let it fall within. there came forth in return only a jingling of the bells. my heart grew sick--on account of the dampness of the catacombs. i hastened to make an end of my labour. i forced the last stone into its position; i plastered it up. against the new masonry i reã«rected the old rampart of bones. for the half of a century no mortal has disturbed them. in pace requiescat.the ways of god in nature, as in providence, are not as our ways; nor are the models that we frame any way commensurate to the vastness, profundity, and unsearchableness of his works, which have a depth in them greater than the well of democritus.   joseph glanvillewe had now reached the summit of the loftiest crag. for some minutes the old man seemed too much exhausted to speak."not long ago," said he at length, "and i could have guided you on this route as well as the youngest of my sons; but, about three years past, there happened to me an event such as never happened to mortal man - or at least such as no man ever survived to tell of - and the six hours of deadly terror which i then endured have broken me up body and soul. you suppose me a very old man - but i am not. it took less than a single day to change these hairs from a jetty black to white, to weaken my limbs, and to unstring my nerves, so that i tremble at the least exertion, and am frightened at a shadow. do you know i can scarcely look over this little cliff without getting giddy?"the "little cliff," upon whose edge he had so carelessly thrown himself down to rest that the weightier portion of his body hung over it, while he was only kept from falling by the tenure of his elbow on its extreme and slippery edge - this "little cliff" arose, a sheer unobstructed precipice of black shining rock, some fifteen or sixteen hundred feet from the world of crags beneath us. nothing would have tempted me to within half a dozen yards of its brink. in truth so deeply was i excited by the perilous position of my companion, that i fell at full length upon the ground, clung to the shrubs around me, and dared not even glance upward at the sky - while i struggled in vain to divest myself of the idea that the very foundations of the mountain were in danger from the fury of the winds. it was long before i could reason myself into sufficient courage to sit up and look out into the distance."you must get over these fancies," said the guide, "for i have brought you here that you might have the best possible view of the scene of that event i mentioned - and to tell you the whole story with the spot just under your eye.""we are now," he continued, in that particularizing manner which distinguished him - "we are now close upon the norwegian coast - in the sixty-eighth degree of latitude - in the great province of nordland - and in the dreary district of lofoden. the mountain upon whose top we sit is helseggen, the cloudy.  now raise yourself up a little higher - hold on to the grass if you feel giddy - so - and look out, beyond the belt of vapor beneath us, into the sea."i looked dizzily, and beheld a wide expanse of ocean, whose waters wore so inky a hue as to bring at once to my mind the nubian geographer's account of the mare tenebrarum . a panorama more deplorably desolate no human imagination can conceive. to the right and left, as far as the eye could reach, there lay outstretched, like ramparts of the world, lines of horridly black and beetling cliff, whose character of gloom was but the more forcibly illustrated by the surf which reared high up against its white and ghastly crest, howling and shrieking forever. just opposite the promontory upon whose apex we were placed, and at a distance of some five or six miles out at sea, there was visible a small, bleak-looking island; or, more properly, its position was discernible through the wilderness of surge in which it was enveloped. about two miles nearer the land, arose another of smaller size, hideously craggy and barren, and encompassed at various intervals by a cluster of dark rocks.the appearance of the ocean, in the space between the more distant island and the shore, had something very unusual about it. although, at the time, so strong a gale was blowing landward that a brig in the remote offing lay to under a double-reefed trysail, and constantly plunged her whole hull out of sight, still there was here nothing like a regular swell, but only a short, quick, angry cross dashing of water in every direction - as well in the teeth of the wind as otherwise. of foam there was little except in the immediate vicinity of the rocks."the island in the distance," resumed the old man, "is called by the norwegians vurrgh. the one midway is moskoe. that a mile to the northward is ambaaren. yonder are islesen, hotholm, keildhelm, suarven, and buckholm. farther off - between moskoe and vurrgh - are otterholm, flimen, sandflesen, and stockholm. these are the true names of the places - but why it has been thought necessary to name them at all, is more than either you or i can understand. do you hear anything? do you see any change in the water?"we had now been about ten minutes upon the top of helseggen, to which we had ascended from the interior of lofoden, so that we had caught no glimpse of the sea until it had burst upon us from the summit. as the old man spoke, i became aware of a loud and gradually increasing sound, like the moaning of a vast herd of buffaloes upon an american prairie; and at the same moment i perceived that what seamen term the chopping character of the ocean beneath us, was rapidly changing into a current which set to the eastward. even while i gazed, this current acquired a monstrous velocity. each moment added to its speed - to its headlong impetuosity. in five minutes the whole sea, as far as vurrgh, was lashed into ungovernable fury; but it was between moskoe and the coast that the main uproar held its sway. here the vast bed of the waters, seamed and scarred into a thousand conflicting channels, burst suddenly into phrensied convulsion - heaving, boiling, hissing - gyrating in gigantic and innumerable vortices, and all whirling and plunging on to the eastward with a rapidity which water never elsewhere assumes except in precipitous descents.in a few minutes more, there came over the scene another radical alteration. the general surface grew somewhat more smooth, and the whirlpools, one by one, disappeared, while prodigious streaks of foam became apparent where none had been seen before. these streaks, at length, spreading out to a great distance, and entering into combination, took unto themselves the gyratory motion of the subsided vortices, and seemed to form the germ of another more vast. suddenly - very suddenly - this assumed a distinct and definite existence, in a circle of more than a mile in diameter. the edge of the whirl was represented by a broad belt of gleaming spray; but no particle of this slipped into the mouth of the terrific funnel, whose interior, as far as the eye could fathom it, was a smooth, shining, and jet-black wall of water, inclined to the horizon at an angle of some forty-five degrees, speeding dizzily round and round with a swaying and sweltering motion, and sending forth to the winds an appalling voice, half shriek, half roar, such as not even the mighty cataract of niagara ever lifts up in its agony to heaven.the mountain trembled to its very base, and the rock rocked. i threw myself upon my face, and clung to the scant herbage in an excess of nervous agitation."this," said i at length, to the old man - "this can be nothing else than the great whirlpool of the maelstrã¶m.""so it is sometimes termed," said he. "we norwegians call it the moskoe-strã¶m, from the island of moskoe in the midway."the ordinary accounts of this vortex had by no means prepared me for what i saw. that of jonas ramus, which is perhaps the most circumstantial of any, cannot impart the faintest conception either of the magnificence, or of the horror of the scene - or of the wild bewildering sense of the novel which confounds the beholder. i am not sure from what point of view the writer in question surveyed it, nor at what time; but it could neither have been from the summit of helseggen, nor during a storm. there are some passages of his description, nevertheless, which may be quoted for their details, although their effect is exceedingly feeble in conveying an impression of the spectacle."between lofoden and moskoe," he says, "the depth of the water is between thirty-six and forty fathoms; but on the other side, toward ver vurrgh this depth decreases so as not to afford a convenient passage for a vessel, without the risk of splitting on the rocks, which happens even in the calmest weather. when it is flood, the stream runs up the country between lofoden and moskoe with a boisterous rapidity; but the roar of its impetuous ebb to the sea is scarce equalled by the loudest and most dreadful cataracts; the noise being heard several leagues off, and the vortices or pits are of such an extent and depth, that if a ship comes within its attraction, it is inevitably absorbed and carried down to the bottom, and there beat to pieces against the rocks; and when the water relaxes, the fragments thereof are thrown up again. but these intervals of tranquility are only at the turn of the ebb and flood, and in calm weather, and last but a quarter of an hour, its violence gradually returning. when the stream is most boisterous, and its fury heightened by a storm, it is dangerous to come within a norway mile of it. boats, yachts, and ships have been carried away by not guarding against it before they were within its reach. it likewise happens frequently, that whales come too near the stream, and are overpowered by its violence; and then it is impossible to describe their howlings and bellowings in their fruitless struggles to disengage themselves. a bear once, attempting to swim from lofoden to moskoe, was caught by the stream and borne down, while he roared terribly, so as to be heard on shore. large stocks of firs and pine trees, after being absorbed by the current, rise again broken and torn to such a degree as if bristles grew upon them. this plainly shows the bottom to consist of craggy rocks, among which they are whirled to and fro. this stream is regulated by the flux and reflux of the sea - it being constantly high and low water every six hours. in the year 1645, early in the morning of sexagesima sunday, it raged with such noise and impetuosity that the very stones of the houses on the coast fell to the ground."in regard to the depth of the water, i could not see how this could have been ascertained at all in the immediate vicinity of the vortex. the "forty fathoms" must have reference only to portions of the channel close upon the shore either of moskoe or lofoden. the depth in the centre of the moskoe-strã¶m must be immeasurably greater; and no better proof of this fact is necessary than can be obtained from even the sidelong glance into the abyss of the whirl which may be had from the highest crag of helseggen. looking down from this pinnacle upon the howling phlegethon below, i could not help smiling at the simplicity with which the honest jonas ramus records, as a matter difficult of belief, the anecdotes of the whales and the bears; for it appeared to me, in fact, a self-evident thing, that the largest ship of the line in existence, coming within the influence of that deadly attraction, could resist it as little as a feather the hurricane, and must disappear bodily and at once.the attempts to account for the phenomenon - some of which, i remember, seemed to me sufficiently plausible in perusal - now wore a very different and unsatisfactory aspect. the idea generally received is that this, as well as three smaller vortices among the ferroe islands, "have no other cause than the collision of waves rising and falling, at flux and reflux, against a ridge of rocks and shelves, which confines the water so that it precipitates itself like a cataract; and thus the higher the flood rises, the deeper must the fall be, and the natural result of all is a whirlpool or vortex, the prodigious suction of which is sufficiently known by lesser experiments." - these are the words of the encyclopã¦dia britannica. kircher and others imagine that in the centre of the channel of the maelstrã¶m is an abyss penetrating the globe, and issuing in some very remote part - the gulf of bothnia being somewhat decidedly named in one instance. this opinion, idle in itself, was the one to which, as i gazed, my imagination most readily assented; and, mentioning it to the guide, i was rather surprised to hear him say that, although it was the view almost universally entertained of the subject by the norwegians, it nevertheless was not his own. as to the former notion he confessed his inability to comprehend it; and here i agreed with him - for, however conclusive on paper, it becomes altogether unintelligible, and even absurd, amid the thunder of the abyss."you have had a good look at the whirl now," said the old man, "and if you will creep round this crag, so as to get in its lee, and deaden the roar of the water, i will tell you a story that will convince you i ought to know something of the moskoe-strã¶m."i placed myself as desired, and he proceeded."myself and my two brothers once owned a schooner-rigged smack of about seventy tons burthen, with which we were in the habit of fishing among the islands beyond moskoe, nearly to vurrgh. in all violent eddies at sea there is good fishing, at proper opportunities, if one has only the courage to attempt it; but among the whole of the lofoden coastmen, we three were the only ones who made a regular business of going out to the islands, as i tell you. the usual grounds are a great way lower down to the southward. there fish can be got at all hours, without much risk, and therefore these places are preferred. the choice spots over here among the rocks, however, not only yield the finest variety, but in far greater abundance; so that we often got in a single day, what the more timid of the craft could not scrape together in a week. in fact, we made it a matter of desperate speculation - the risk of life standing instead of labor, and courage answering for capital."we kept the smack in a cove about five miles higher up the coast than this; and it was our practice, in fine weather, to take advantage of the fifteen minutes' slack to push across the main channel of the moskoe-strã¶m, far above the pool, and then drop down upon anchorage somewhere near otterholm, or sandflesen, where the eddies are not so violent as elsewhere. here we used to remain until nearly time for slack-water again, when we weighed and made for home. we never set out upon this expedition without a steady side wind for going and coming - one that we felt sure would not fail us before our return - and we seldom made a mis-calculation upon this point. twice, during six years, we were forced to stay all night at anchor on account of a dead calm, which is a rare thing indeed just about here; and once we had to remain on the grounds nearly a week, starving to death, owing to a gale which blew up shortly after our arrival, and made the channel too boisterous to be thought of. upon this occasion we should have been driven out to sea in spite of everything, for the whirlpools threw us round and round so violently, that, at length, we fouled our anchor and dragged it if it had not been that we drifted into one of the innumerable cross currents - here to-day and gone to-morrow - which drove us under the lee of flimen, where, by good luck, we brought up."i could not tell you the twentieth part of the difficulties we encountered 'on the grounds' - it is a bad spot to be in, even in good weather - but we made shift always to run the gauntlet of the moskoe-strã¶m itself without accident; although at times my heart has been in my mouth when we happened to be a minute or so behind or before the slack. the wind sometimes was not as strong as we thought it at starting, and then we made rather less way than we could wish, while the current rendered the smack unmanageable. my eldest brother had a son eighteen years old, and i had two stout boys of my own. these would have been of great assistance at such times, in using the sweeps, as well as afterward in fishing - but, somehow, although we ran the risk ourselves, we had not the heart to let the young ones get into the danger - for, after all is said and done, it was a horrible danger, and that is the truth."it is now within a few days of three years since what i am going to tell you occurred. it was on the tenth day of july, 18-, a day which the people of this part of the world will never forget - for it was one in which blew the most terrible hurricane that ever came out of the heavens. and yet all the morning, and indeed until late in the afternoon, there was a gentle and steady breeze from the south-west, while the sun shone brightly, so that the oldest seaman among us could not have foreseen what was to follow."the three of us - my two brothers and myself - had crossed over to the islands about two o'clock p. m., and had soon nearly loaded the smack with fine fish, which, we all remarked, were more plenty that day than we had ever known them. it was just seven, by my watch , when we weighed and started for home, so as to make the worst of the strã¶m at slack water, which we knew would be at eight."we set out with a fresh wind on our starboard quarter, and for some time spanked along at a great rate, never dreaming of danger, for indeed we saw not the slightest reason to apprehend it. all at once we were taken aback by a breeze from over helseggen. this was most unusual - something that had never happened to us before - and i began to feel a little uneasy, without exactly knowing why. we put the boat on the wind, but could make no headway at all for the eddies, and i was upon the point of proposing to return to the anchorage, when, looking astern, we saw the whole horizon covered with a singular copper-colored cloud that rose with the most amazing velocity."in the meantime the breeze that had headed us off fell away, and we were dead becalmed, drifting about in every direction. this state of things, however, did not last long enough to give us time to think about it. in less than a minute the storm was upon us - in less than two the sky was entirely overcast - and what with this and the driving spray, it became suddenly so dark that we could not see each other in the smack."such a hurricane as then blew it is folly to attempt describing. the oldest seaman in norway never experienced any thing like it. we had let our sails go by the run before it cleverly took us; but, at the first puff, both our masts went by the board as if they had been sawed off - the mainmast taking with it my youngest brother, who had lashed himself to it for safety."our boat was the lightest feather of a thing that ever sat upon water. it had a complete flush deck, with only a small hatch near the bow, and this hatch it had always been our custom to batten down when about to cross the strã¶m, by way of precaution against the chopping seas. but for this circumstance we should have foundered at once - for we lay entirely buried for some moments. how my elder brother escaped destruction i cannot say, for i never had an opportunity of ascertaining. for my part, as soon as i had let the foresail run, i threw myself flat on deck, with my feet against the narrow gunwale of the bow, and with my hands grasping a ring-bolt near the foot of the fore-mast. it was mere instinct that prompted me to do this - which was undoubtedly the very best thing i could have done - for i was too much flurried to think."for some moments we were completely deluged, as i say, and all this time i held my breath, and clung to the bolt. when i could stand it no longer i raised myself upon my knees, still keeping hold with my hands, and thus got my head clear. presently our little boat gave herself a shake, just as a dog does in coming out of the water, and thus rid herself, in some measure, of the seas. i was now trying to get the better of the stupor that had come over me, and to collect my senses so as to see what was to be done, when i felt somebody grasp my arm. it was my elder brother, and my heart leaped for joy, for i had made sure that he was overboard - but the next moment all this joy was turned into horror - for he put his mouth close to my ear, and screamed out the word ' moskoe-strã¶m! '"no one ever will know what my feelings were at that moment. i shook from head to foot as if i had had the most violent fit of the ague. i knew what he meant by that one word well enough - i knew what he wished to make me understand. with the wind that now drove us on, we were bound for the whirl of the strã¶m, and nothing could save us!"you perceive that in crossing the strã¶m channel, we always went a long way up above the whirl, even in the calmest weather, and then had to wait and watch carefully for the slack - but now we were driving right upon the pool itself, and in such a hurricane as this! 'to be sure,' i thought, 'we shall get there just about the slack - there is some little hope in that' - but in the next moment i cursed myself for being so great a fool as to dream of hope at all. i knew very well that we were doomed, had we been ten times a ninety-gun ship."by this time the first fury of the tempest had spent itself, or perhaps we did not feel it so much, as we scudded before it, but at all events the seas, which at first had been kept down by the wind, and lay flat and frothing, now got up into absolute mountains. a singular change, too, had come over the heavens. around in every direction it was still as black as pitch, but nearly overhead there burst out, all at once, a circular rift of clear sky - as clear as i ever saw - and of a deep bright blue - and through it there blazed forth the full moon with a lustre that i never before knew her to wear. she lit up every thing about us with the greatest distinctness - but, oh god, what a scene it was to light up!"i now made one or two attempts to speak to my brother - but, in some manner which i could not understand, the din had so increased that i could not make him hear a single word, although i screamed at the top of my voice in his ear. presently he shook his head, looking as pale as death, and held up one of his finger, as if to say 'listen!'"at first i could not make out what he meant - but soon a hideous thought flashed upon me. i dragged my watch from its fob. it was not going. i glanced at its face by the moonlight, and then burst into tears as i flung it far away into the ocean. it had run down at seven o'clock! we were behind the time of the slack, and the whirl of the strã¶m was in full fury!"when a boat is well built, properly trimmed, and not deep laden, the waves in a strong gale, when she is going large, seem always to slip from beneath her - which appears very strange to a landsman - and this is what is called riding, in sea phrase. well, so far we had ridden the swells very cleverly; but presently a gigantic sea happened to take us right under the counter, and bore us with it as it rose - up - up - as if into the sky. i would not have believed that any wave could rise so high. and then down we came with a sweep, a slide, and a plunge, that made me feel sick and dizzy, as if i was falling from some lofty mountain-top in a dream. but while we were up i had thrown a quick glance around - and that one glance was all sufficient. i saw our exact position in an instant. the moskoe-strã¶m whirlpool was about a quarter of a mile dead ahead - but no more like the every-day moskoe-strã¶m, than the whirl as you now see it is like a mill-race. if i had not known where we were, and what we had to expect, i should not have recognised the place at all. as it was, i involuntarily closed my eyes in horror. the lids clenched themselves together as if in a spasm."it could not have been more than two minutes afterward until we suddenly felt the waves subside, and were enveloped in foam. the boat made a sharp half turn to larboard, and then shot off in its new direction like a thunderbolt. at the same moment the roaring noise of the water was completely drowned in a kind of shrill shriek - such a sound as you might imagine given out by the waste-pipes of many thousand steam-vessels, letting off their steam all together. we were now in the belt of surf that always surrounds the whirl; and i thought, of course, that another moment would plunge us into the abyss - down which we could only see indistinctly on account of the amazing velocity with which we wore borne along. the boat did not seem to sink into the water at all, but to skim like an air-bubble upon the surface of the surge. her starboard side was next the whirl, and on the larboard arose the world of ocean we had left. it stood like a huge writhing wall between us and the horizon."it may appear strange, but now, when we were in the very jaws of the gulf, i felt more composed than when we were only approaching it. having made up my mind to hope no more, i got rid of a great deal of that terror which unmanned me at first. i suppose it was despair that strung my nerves."it may look like boasting - but what i tell you is truth - i began to reflect how magnificent a thing it was to die in such a manner, and how foolish it was in me to think of so paltry a consideration as my own individual life, in view of so wonderful a manifestation of god's power. i do believe that i blushed with shame when this idea crossed my mind. after a little while i became possessed with the keenest curiosity about the whirl itself. i positively felt a wish to explore its depths, even at the sacrifice i was going to make; and my principal grief was that i should never be able to tell my old companions on shore about the mysteries i should see. these, no doubt, were singular fancies to occupy a man's mind in such extremity - and i have often thought since, that the revolutions of the boat around the pool might have rendered me a little light-headed."there was another circumstance which tended to restore my self-possession; and this was the cessation of the wind, which could not reach us in our present situation - for, as you saw yourself, the belt of surf is considerably lower than the general bed of the ocean, and this latter now towered above us, a high, black, mountainous ridge. if you have never been at sea in a heavy gale, you can form no idea of the confusion of mind occasioned by the wind and spray together. they blind, deafen, and strangle you, and take away all power of action or reflection. but we were now, in a great measure, rid of these annoyances - just us death-condemned felons in prison are allowed petty indulgences, forbidden them while their doom is yet uncertain."how often we made the circuit of the belt it is impossible to say. we careered round and round for perhaps an hour, flying rather than floating, getting gradually more and more into the middle of the surge, and then nearer and nearer to its horrible inner edge. all this time i had never let go of the ring-bolt. my brother was at the stern, holding on to a small empty water-cask which had been securely lashed under the coop of the counter, and was the only thing on deck that had not been swept overboard when the gale first took us. as we approached the brink of the pit he let go his hold upon this, and made for the ring, from which, in the agony of his terror, he endeavored to force my hands, as it was not large enough to afford us both a secure grasp. i never felt deeper grief than when i saw him attempt this act - although i knew he was a madman when he did it - a raving maniac through sheer fright. i did not care, however, to contest the point with him. i knew it could make no difference whether either of us held on at all; so i let him have the bolt, and went astern to the cask. this there was no great difficulty in doing; for the smack flew round steadily enough, and upon an even keel - only swaying to and fro, with the immense sweeps and swelters of the whirl. scarcely had i secured myself in my new position, when we gave a wild lurch to starboard, and rushed headlong into the abyss. i muttered a hurried prayer to god, and thought all was over."as i felt the sickening sweep of the descent, i had instinctively tightened my hold upon the barrel, and closed my eyes. for some seconds i dared not open them - while i expected instant destruction, and wondered that i was not already in my death-struggles with the water. but moment after moment elapsed. i still lived. the sense of falling had ceased; and the motion of the vessel seemed much as it had been before, while in the belt of foam, with the exception that she now lay more along. i took courage, and looked once again upon the scene."never shall i forget the sensations of awe, horror, and admiration with which i gazed about me. the boat appeared to be hanging, as if by magic, midway down, upon the interior surface of a funnel vast in circumference, prodigious in depth, and whose perfectly smooth sides might have been mistaken for ebony, but for the bewildering rapidity with which they spun around, and for the gleaming and ghastly radiance they shot forth, as the rays of the full moon, from that circular rift amid the clouds which i have already described, streamed in a flood of golden glory along the black walls, and far away down into the inmost recesses of the abyss."at first i was too much confused to observe anything accurately. the general burst of terrific grandeur was all that i beheld. when i recovered myself a little, however, my gaze fell instinctively downward. in this direction i was able to obtain an unobstructed view, from the manner in which the smack hung on the inclined surface of the pool. she was quite upon an even keel - that is to say, her deck lay in a plane parallel with that of the water - but this latter sloped at an angle of more than forty-five degrees, so that we seemed to be lying upon our beam-ends. i could not help observing, nevertheless, that i had scarcely more difficulty in maintaining my hold and footing in this situation, than if we had been upon a dead level; and this, i suppose, was owing to the speed at which we revolved."the rays of the moon seemed to search the very bottom of the profound gulf; but still i could make out nothing distinctly, on account of a thick mist in which everything there was enveloped, and over which there hung a magnificent rainbow, like that narrow and tottering bridge which mussulmen say is the only pathway between time and eternity. this mist, or spray, was no doubt occasioned by the clashing of the great walls of the funnel, as they all met together at the bottom - but the yell that went up to the heavens from out of that mist, i dare not attempt to describe."our first slide into the abyss itself, from the belt of foam above, had carried us a great distance down the slope; but our farther descent was by no means proportionate. round and round we swept - not with any uniform movement - but in dizzying swings and jerks, that sent us sometimes only a few hundred yards - sometimes nearly the complete circuit of the whirl. our progress downward, at each revolution, was slow, but very perceptible."looking about me upon the wide waste of liquid ebony on which we were thus borne, i perceived that our boat was not the only object in the embrace of the whirl. both above and below us were visible fragments of vessels, large masses of building timber and trunks of trees, with many smaller articles, such as pieces of house furniture, broken boxes, barrels and staves. i have already described the unnatural curiosity which had taken the place of my original terrors. it appeared to grow upon me as i drew nearer and nearer to my dreadful doom. i now began to watch, with a strange interest, the numerous things that floated in our company. i must have been delirious - for i even sought amusement in speculating upon the relative velocities of their several descents toward the foam below. 'this fir tree,' i found myself at one time saying, 'will certainly be the next thing that takes the awful plunge and disappears,' - and then i was disappointed to find that the wreck of a dutch merchant ship overtook it and went down before. at length, after making several guesses of this nature, and being deceived in all - this fact - the fact of my invariable miscalculation - set me upon a train of reflection that made my limbs again tremble, and my heart beat heavily once more."it was not a new terror that thus affected me, but the dawn of a more exciting hope. this hope arose partly from memory, and partly from present observation. i called to mind the great variety of buoyant matter that strewed the coast of lofoden, having been absorbed and then thrown forth by the moskoe-strã¶m. by far the greater number of the articles were shattered in the most extraordinary way - so chafed and roughened as to have the appearance of being stuck full of splinters - but then i distinctly recollected that there were some of them which were not disfigured at all. now i could not account for this difference except by supposing that the roughened fragments were the only ones which had been completely absorbed - that the others had entered the whirl at so late a period of the tide, or, for some reason, had descended so slowly after entering, that they did not reach the bottom before the turn of the flood came, or of the ebb, as the case might be. i conceived it possible, in either instance, that they might thus be whirled up again to the level of the ocean, without undergoing the fate of those which had been drawn in more early, or absorbed more rapidly. i made, also, three important observations. the first was, that, as a general rule, the larger the bodies were, the more rapid their descent - the second, that, between two masses of equal extent, the one spherical, and the other of any other shape , the superiority in speed of descent was with the sphere - the third, that, between two masses of equal size, the one cylindrical, and the other of any other shape, the cylinder was absorbed the more slowly. since my escape, i have had several conversations on this subject with an old school-master of the district; and it was from him that i learned the use of the words 'cylinder' and 'sphere.' he explained to me - although i have forgotten the explanation - how what i observed was, in fact, the natural consequence of the forms of the floating fragments - and showed me how it happened that a cylinder, swimming in a vortex, offered more resistance to its suction, and was drawn in with greater difficulty than an equally bulky body, of any form whatever."there was one startling circumstance which went a great way in enforcing these observations, and rendering me anxious to turn them to account, and this was that, at every revolution, we passed something like a barrel, or else the yard or the mast of a vessel, while many of these things, which had been on our level when i first opened my eyes upon the wonders of the whirlpool, were now high up above us, and seemed to have moved but little from their original station."i no longer hesitated what to do. i resolved to lash myself securely to the water cask upon which i now held, to cut it loose from the counter, and to throw myself with it into the water. i attracted my brother's attention by signs, pointed to the floating barrels that came near us, and did everything in my power to make him understand what i was about to do. i thought at length that he comprehended my design - but, whether this was the case or not, he shook his head despairingly, and refused to move from his station by the ring-bolt. it was impossible to reach him; the emergency admitted of no delay; and so, with a bitter struggle, i resigned him to his fate, fastened myself to the cask by means of the lashings which secured it to the counter, and precipitated myself with it into the sea, without another moment's hesitation."the result was precisely what i had hoped it might be. as it is myself who now tell you this tale - as you see that i did escape - and as you are already in possession of the mode in which this escape was effected, and must therefore anticipate all that i have farther to say - i will bring my story quickly to conclusion. it might have been an hour, or thereabout, after my quitting the smack, when, having descended to a vast distance beneath me, it made three or four wild gyrations in rapid succession, and, bearing my loved brother with it, plunged headlong, at once and forever, into the chaos of foam below. the barrel to which i was attached sunk very little farther than half the distance between the bottom of the gulf and the spot at which i leaped overboard, before a great change took place in the character of the whirlpool. the slope of the sides of the vast funnel became momently less and less steep. the gyrations of the whirl grew, gradually, less and less violent. by degrees, the froth and the rainbow disappeared, and the bottom of the gulf seemed slowly to uprise. the sky was clear, the winds had gone down, and the full moon was setting radiantly in the west, when i found myself on the surface of the ocean, in full view of the shores of lofoden, and above the spot where the pool of the moskoe-strã¶m had been. it was the hour of the slack - but the sea still heaved in mountainous waves from the effects of the hurricane. i was borne violently into the channel of the strã¶m, and in a few minutes was hurried down the coast into the 'grounds' of the fishermen. a boat picked me up - exhausted from fatigue - and now that the danger was removed speechless from the memory of its horror. those who drew me on board were my old mates and daily companions - but they knew me no more than they would have known a traveller from the spirit-land. my hair which had been raven-black the day before, was as white as you see it now. they say too that the whole expression of my countenance had changed. i told them my story - they did not believe it. i now tell it to you - and i can scarcely expect you to put more faith in it than did the merry fishermen of lofoden."of course i shall not pretend to consider it any matter for wonder, that the extraordinary case of m. valdemar has excited discussion. it would have been a miracle had it not-especially under the circumstances. through the desire of all parties concerned, to keep the affair from the public, at least for the present, or until we had farther opportunities for investigation -- through our endeavors to effect this -- a garbled or exaggerated account made its way into society, and became the source of many unpleasant misrepresentations, and, very naturally, of a great deal of disbelief.it is now rendered necessary that i give the facts -- as far as i comprehend them myself. they are, succinctly, these:my attention, for the last three years, had been repeatedly drawn to the subject of mesmerism; and, about nine months ago it occurred to me, quite suddenly, that in the series of experiments made hitherto, there had been a very remarkable and most unaccountable omission: -- no person had as yet been mesmerized in articulo mortis. it remained to be seen, first, whether, in such condition, there existed in the patient any susceptibility to the magnetic influence; secondly, whether, if any existed, it was impaired or increased by the condition; thirdly, to what extent, or for how long a period, the encroachments of death might be arrested by the process. there were other points to be ascertained, but these most excited my curiosity -- the last in especial, from the immensely important character of its consequences.in looking around me for some subject by whose means i might test these particulars, i was brought to think of my friend, m. ernest valdemar, the well-known compiler of the "bibliotheca forensica," and author under the nom de plume of issachar marx of the polish versions of "wallenstein" and "gargantua." m. valdemar, who has resided principally at harlaem, n.y., since the year 1839, is or was particularly noticeable for the extreme spareness of his person -- his lower limbs much resembling those of john randolph; and, also, for the whiteness of his whiskers, in violent contrast to the blackness of his hair -- the latter, in consequence, being very generally mistaken for a wig. his temperament was markedly nervous, and rendered him a good subject for mesmeric experiment. on two or three occasions i had put him to sleep with little difficulty, but was disappointed in other results which his peculiar constitution had naturally led me to anticipate. his will was at no period positively, or thoroughly, under my control, and in regard to clairvoyance, i could accomplish with him nothing to be relied upon. i always attributed my failure at these points to the disordered state of his health. for some months previous to my becoming acquainted with him, his physicians had declared him in a confirmed phthisis. it was his custom, indeed, to speak calmly of his approaching dissolution, as of a matter neither to be avoided nor regretted.when the ideas to which i have alluded first occurred to me, it was of course very natural that i should think of m. valdemar. i knew the steady philosophy of the man too well to apprehend any scruples from him; and he had no relatives in america who would be likely to interfere. i spoke to him frankly upon the subject; and, to my surprise, his interest seemed vividly excited. i say to my surprise, for, although he had always yielded his person freely to my experiments, he had never before given me any tokens of sympathy with what i did. his disease was if that character which would admit of exact calculation in respect to the epoch of its termination in death; and it was finally arranged between us that he would send for me about twenty-four hours before the period announced by his physicians as that of his decease.it is now rather more than seven months since i received, from m. valdemar himself, the subjoined note:my dear p -- ,you may as well come now. d -- and f -- are agreed that i cannot hold out beyond to-morrow midnight; and i think they have hit the time very nearly.valdemari received this note within half an hour after it was written, and in fifteen minutes more i was in the dying man's chamber. i had not seen him for ten days, and was appalled by the fearful alteration which the brief interval had wrought in him. his face wore a leaden hue; the eyes were utterly lustreless; and the emaciation was so extreme that the skin had been broken through by the cheek-bones. his expectoration was excessive. the pulse was barely perceptible. he retained, nevertheless, in a very remarkable manner, both his mental power and a certain degree of physical strength. he spoke with distinctness -- took some palliative medicines without aid -- and, when i entered the room, was occupied in penciling memoranda in a pocket-book. he was propped up in the bed by pillows. doctors d -- and f -- were in attendance.after pressing valdemar's hand, i took these gentlemen aside, and obtained from them a minute account of the patient's condition. the left lung had been for eighteen months in a semi-osseous or cartilaginous state, and was, of course, entirely useless for all purposes of vitality. the right, in its upper portion, was also partially, if not thoroughly, ossified, while the lower region was merely a mass of purulent tubercles, running one into another. several extensive perforations existed; and, at one point, permanent adhesion to the ribs had taken place. these appearances in the right lobe were of comparatively recent date. the ossification had proceeded with very unusual rapidity; no sign of it had discovered a month before, and the adhesion had only been observed during the three previous days. independently of the phthisis, the patient was suspected of aneurism of the aorta; but on this point the osseous symptoms rendered an exact diagnosis impossible. it was the opinion of both physicians that m. valdemar would die about midnight on the morrow sunday. it was then seven o'clock on saturday evening.on quitting the invalid's bed-side to hold conversation with myself, doctors d -- and f -- had bidden him a final farewell. it had not been their intention to return; but, at my request, they agreed to look in upon the patient about ten the next night.when they had gone, i spoke freely with m. valdemar on the subject of his approaching dissolution, as well as, more particularly, of the experiment proposed. he still professed himself quite willing and even anxious to have it made, and urged me to commence it at once. a male and a female nurse were in attendance; but i did not feel myself altogether at liberty to engage in a task of this character with no more reliable witnesses than these people, in case of sudden accident, might prove. i therefore postponed operations until about eight the next night, when the arrival of a medical student with whom i had some acquaintance, mr. theodore l -- l, relieved me from farther embarrassment. it had been my design, originally, to wait for the physicians; but i was induced to proceed, first, by the urgent entreaties of m. valdemar, and secondly, by my conviction that i had not a moment to lose, as he was evidently sinking fast.mr. l -- l was so kind as to accede to my desire that he would take notes of all that occurred, and it is from his memoranda that what i now have to relate is, for the most part, either condensed or copied verbatim.it wanted about five minutes of eight when, taking the patient's hand, i begged him to state, as distinctly as he could, to mr. l -- l, whether he m. valdemar was entirely willing that i should make the experiment of mesmerizing him in his then condition.he replied feebly, yet quite audibly, "yes, i wish to be "i fear you have mesmerized" -- adding immediately afterwards, deferred it too long."while he spoke thus, i commenced the passes which i had already found most effectual in subduing him. he was evidently influenced with the first lateral stroke of my hand across his forehead; but although i exerted all my powers, no farther perceptible effect was induced until some minutes after ten o'clock, when doctors d -- and f -- called, according to appointment. i explained to them, in a few words, what i designed, and as they opposed no objection, saying that the patient was already in the death agony, i proceeded without hesitation -- exchanging, however, the lateral passes for downward ones, and directing my gaze entirely into the right eye of the sufferer.by this time his pulse was imperceptible and his breathing was stertorous, and at intervals of half a minute.this condition was nearly unaltered for a quarter of an hour. at the expiration of this period, however, a natural although a very deep sigh escaped the bosom of the dying man, and the stertorous breathing ceased -- that is to say, its stertorousness was no longer apparent; the intervals were undiminished. the patient's extremities were of an icy coldness.at five minutes before eleven i perceived unequivocal signs of the mesmeric influence. the glassy roll of the eye was changed for that expression of uneasy inward examination which is never seen except in cases of sleep-waking, and which it is quite impossible to mistake. with a few rapid lateral passes i made the lids quiver, as in incipient sleep, and with a few more i closed them altogether. i was not satisfied, however, with this, but continued the manipulations vigorously, and with the fullest exertion of the will, until i had completely stiffened the limbs of the slumberer, after placing them in a seemingly easy position. the legs were at full length; the arms were nearly so, and reposed on the bed at a moderate distance from the loin. the head was very slightly elevated.when i had accomplished this, it was fully midnight, and i requested the gentlemen present to examine m. valdemar's condition. after a few experiments, they admitted him to be an unusually perfect state of mesmeric trance. the curiosity of both the physicians was greatly excited. dr. d -- resolved at once to remain with the patient all night, while dr. f -- took leave with a promise to return at daybreak. mr. l -- l and the nurses remained.we left m. valdemar entirely undisturbed until about three o'clock in the morning, when i approached him and found him in precisely the same condition as when dr. f -- went away -- that is to say, he lay in the same position; the pulse was imperceptible; the breathing was gentle scarcely noticeable, unless through the application of a mirror to the lips; the eyes were closed naturally; and the limbs were as rigid and as cold as marble. still, the general appearance was certainly not that of death.as i approached m. valdemar i made a kind of half effort to influence his right arm into pursuit of my own, as i passed the latter gently to and fro above his person. in such experiments with this patient had never perfectly succeeded before, and assuredly i had little thought of succeeding now; but to my astonishment, his arm very readily, although feebly, followed every direction i assigned it with mine. i determined to hazard a few words of conversation."m. valdemar," i said, "are you asleep?" he made no answer, but i perceived a tremor about the lips, and was thus induced to repeat the question, again and again. at its third repetition, his whole frame was agitated by a very slight shivering; the eyelids unclosed themselves so far as to display a white line of the ball; the lips moved sluggishly, and from between them, in a barely audible whisper, issued the words:"yes; -- asleep now. do not wake me! -- let me die so!"i here felt the limbs and found them as rigid as ever. the right arm, as before, obeyed the direction of my hand. i questioned the sleep-waker again:"do you still feel pain in the breast, m. valdemar?"the answer now was immediate, but even less audible than before: "no pain -- i am dying."i did not think it advisable to disturb him farther just then, and nothing more was said or done until the arrival of dr. f -- , who came a little before sunrise, and expressed unbounded astonishment at finding the patient still alive. after feeling the pulse and applying a mirror to the lips, he requested me to speak to the sleep-waker again. i did so, saying:"m. valdemar, do you still sleep?"as before, some minutes elapsed ere a reply was made; and during the interval the dying man seemed to be collecting his energies to speak. at my fourth repetition of the question, he said very faintly, almost inaudibly:"yes; still asleep -- dying."it was now the opinion, or rather the wish, of the physicians, that m. valdemar should be suffered to remain undisturbed in his present apparently tranquil condition, until death should supervene -- and this, it was generally agreed, must now take place within a few minutes. i concluded, however, to speak to him once more, and merely repeated my previous question.while i spoke, there came a marked change over the countenance of the sleep-waker. the eyes rolled themselves slowly open, the pupils disappearing upwardly; the skin generally assumed a cadaverous hue, resembling not so much parchment as white paper; and the circular hectic spots which, hitherto, had been strongly defined in the centre of each cheek, went out at once. i use this expression, because the suddenness of their departure put me in mind of nothing so much as the extinguishment of a candle by a puff of the breath. the upper lip, at the same time, writhed itself away from the teeth, which it had previously covered completely; while the lower jaw fell with an audible jerk, leaving the mouth widely extended, and disclosing in full view the swollen and blackened tongue. i presume that no member of the party then present had been unaccustomed to death-bed horrors; but so hideous beyond conception was the appearance of m. valdemar at this moment, that there was a general shrinking back from the region of the bed.i now feel that i have reached a point of this narrative at which every reader will be startled into positive disbelief. it is my business, however, simply to proceed.there was no longer the faintest sign of vitality in m. valdemar; and concluding him to be dead, we were consigning him to the charge of the nurses, when a strong vibratory motion was observable in the tongue. this continued for perhaps a minute. at the expiration of this period, there issued from the distended and motionless jaws a voice -- such as it would be madness in me to attempt describing. there are, indeed, two or three epithets which might be considered as applicable to it in part; i might say, for example, that the sound was harsh, and broken and hollow; but the hideous whole is indescribable, for the simple reason that no similar sounds have ever jarred upon the ear of humanity. there were two particulars, nevertheless, which i thought then, and still think, might fairly be stated as characteristic of the intonation -- as well adapted to convey some idea of its unearthly peculiarity. in the first place, the voice seemed to reach our ears -- at least mine -- from a vast distance, or from some deep cavern within the earth. in the second place, it impressed me i fear, indeed, that it will be impossible to make myself comprehended as gelatinous or glutinous matters impress the sense of touch.i have spoken both of "sound" and of "voice." i mean to say that the sound was one of distinct -- of even wonderfully, thrillingly distinct -- syllabification. m. valdemar spoke -- obviously in reply to the question i had propounded to him a few minutes before. i had asked him, it will be remembered, if he still slept. he now said:"yes; -- no; -- i have been sleeping -- and now -- now -- i am dead.no person present even affected to deny, or attempted to repress, the unutterable, shuddering horror which these few words, thus uttered, were so well calculated to convey. mr. l -- l the student swooned. the nurses immediately left the chamber, and could not be induced to return. my own impressions i would not pretend to render intelligible to the reader. for nearly an hour, we busied ourselves, silently -- without the utterance of a word -- in endeavors to revive mr. l -- l. when he came to himself, we addressed ourselves again to an investigation of m. valdemar's condition.it remained in all respects as i have last described it, with the exception that the mirror no longer afforded evidence of respiration. an attempt to draw blood from the arm failed. i should mention, too, that this limb was no farther subject to my will. i endeavored in vain to make it follow the direction of my hand. the only real indication, indeed, of the mesmeric influence, was now found in the vibratory movement of the tongue, whenever i addressed m. valdemar a question. he seemed to be making an effort to reply, but had no longer sufficient volition. to queries put to him by any other person than myself he seemed utterly insensible -- although i endeavored to place each member of the company in mesmeric rapport with him. i believe that i have now related all that is necessary to an understanding of the sleep-waker's state at this epoch. other nurses were procured; and at ten o'clock i left the house in company with the two physicians and mr. l -- l.in the afternoon we all called again to see the patient. his condition remained precisely the same. we had now some discussion as to the propriety and feasibility of awakening him; but we had little difficulty in agreeing that no good purpose would be served by so doing. it was evident that, so far, death or what is usually termed death had been arrested by the mesmeric process. it seemed clear to us all that to awaken m. valdemar would be merely to insure his instant, or at least his speedy dissolution.from this period until the close of last week -- an interval of nearly seven months -- we continued to make daily calls at m. valdemar's house, accompanied, now and then, by medical and other friends. all this time the sleeper-waker remained exactly as i have last described him. the nurses' attentions were continual.it was on friday last that we finally resolved to make the experiment of awakening or attempting to awaken him; and it is the perhaps unfortunate result of this latter experiment which has given rise to so much discussion in private circles -- to so much of what i cannot help thinking unwarranted popular feeling.for the purpose of relieving m. valdemar from the mesmeric trance, i made use of the customary passes. these, for a time, were unsuccessful. the first indication of revival was afforded by a partial descent of the iris. it was observed, as especially remarkable, that this lowering of the pupil was accompanied by the profuse out-flowing of a yellowish ichor from beneath the lids of a pungent and highly offensive odor.it was now suggested that i should attempt to influence the patient's arm, as heretofore. i made the attempt and failed. dr. f -- then intimated a desire to have me put a question. i did so, as follows:"m. valdemar, can you explain to us what are your feelings or wishes now?"there was an instant return of the hectic circles on the cheeks; the tongue quivered, or rather rolled violently in the mouth although the jaws and lips remained rigid as before; and at length the same hideous voice which i have already described, broke forth:"for god's sake! -- quick! -- quick! -- put me to sleep -- or, quick! -- waken me! -- quick! -- i say to you that i am dead!"i was thoroughly unnerved, and for an instant remained undecided what to do. at first i made an endeavor to re-compose the patient; but, failing in this through total abeyance of the will, i retraced my steps and as earnestly struggled to awaken him. in this attempt i soon saw that i should be successful -- or at least i soon fancied that my success would be complete -- and i am sure that all in the room were prepared to see the patient awaken.for what really occurred, however, it is quite impossible that any human being could have been prepared.as i rapidly made the mesmeric passes, amid ejaculations of "dead! dead!" absolutely bursting from the tongue and not from the lips of the sufferer, his whole frame at once -- within the space of a single minute, or even less, shrunk -- crumbled -- absolutely rotted away beneath my hands. upon the bed, before that whole company, there lay a nearly liquid mass of loathsome -- of detestable putridity.son coeur est un luth suspendu; sitot qu'on le touche il resonne. --de beranger.during the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the autumn of the year, when the clouds hung oppressively low in the heavens, i had been passing alone, on horseback, through a singularly dreary tract of country; and at length found myself, as the shades of the evening drew on, within view of the melancholy house of usher. i know not how it was--but, with the first glimpse of the building, a sense of insufferable gloom pervaded my spirit. i say insufferable; for the feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-pleasurable, because poetic, sentiment, with which the mind usually receives even the sternest natural images of the desolate or terrible. i looked upon the scene before me--upon the mere house, and the simple landscape features of the domain--upon the bleak walls--upon the vacant eye-like windows--upon a few rank sedges--and upon a few white trunks of decayed trees--with an utter depression of soul which i can compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to the after-dream of the reveller upon opium--the bitter lapse into everyday life-the hideous dropping off of the reveller upon opium--the bitter lapse into everyday life--the hideous dropping off of the veil. there was an iciness, a sinking, a sickening of the heart--an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no goading of the imagination could torture into aught of the sublime. what was it--i paused to think--what was it that so unnerved me in the contemplation of the house of usher? it was a mystery all insoluble; nor could i grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as i pondered. i was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion, that while, beyond doubt, there are combinations of very simple natural objects which have the power of thus affecting us, still the analysis of this power lies among considerations beyond our depth. it was possible, i reflected, that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the scene, of the details of the picture, would be sufficient to modify, or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful impression; and, acting upon this idea, i reined my horse to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in unruffled lustre by the dwelling, and gazed down--but with a shudder even more thrilling than before--upon the remodelled and inverted images of the gray sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and the vacant and eye-like windows.nevertheless, in this mansion of gloom i now proposed to myself a sojourn of some weeks. its proprietor, roderick usher, had been one of my boon companions in boyhood; but many years had elapsed since our last meeting. a letter, however, had lately reached me in a distant part of the country--a letter from him--which, in its wildly importunate nature, had admitted of no other than a personal reply. the ms. gave evidence of nervous agitation. the writer spoke of acute bodily illness--of a mental disorder which oppressed him--and of an earnest desire to see me, as his best, and indeed his only personal friend, with a view of attempting, by the cheerfulness of my society, some alleviation of his malady. it was the manner in which all this, and much more, was said--it the apparent heart that went with his request--which allowed me no room for hesitation; and i accordingly obeyed forthwith what i still considered a very singular summons.although, as boys, we had been even intimate associates, yet really knew little of my friend. his reserve had been always excessive and habitual. i was aware, however, that his very ancient family had been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiar sensibility of temperament, displaying itself, through long ages, in many works of exalted art, and manifested, of late, in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity, as well as in a passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even more than to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties, of musical science. i had learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that the stem of the usher race, all time-honoured as it was, had put forth, at no period, any enduring branch; in other words, that the entire family lay in the direct line of descent, and had always, with very trifling and very temporary variation, so lain. it was this deficiency, i considered, while running over in thought the perfect keeping of the character of the premises with the accredited character of the people, and while speculating upon the possible influence which the one, in the long lapse of centuries, might have exercised upon the other--it was this deficiency, perhaps, of collateral issue, and the consequent undeviating transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimony with the name, which had, at length, so identified the two as to merge the original title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal appellation of the "house of usher"--an appellation which seemed to include, in the minds of the peasantry who used it, both the family and the family mansion.i have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish experiment--that of looking down within the tarn--had been to deepen the first singular impression. there can be no doubt that the consciousness of the rapid increase of my superstition--for why should i not so term it?--served mainly to accelerate the increase itself. such, i have long known, is the paradoxical law of all sentiments having terror as a basis. and it might have been for this reason only, that, when i again uplifted my eyes to the house itself, from its image in the pool, there grew in my mind a strange fancy--a fancy so ridiculous, indeed, that i but mention it to show the vivid force of the sensations which oppressed me. i had so worked upon my imagination as really to believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an atmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity-an atmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven, but which had reeked up from the decayed trees, and the gray wall, and the silent tarn--a pestilent and mystic vapour, dull, sluggish, faintly discernible, and leaden-hued.shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream, i scanned more narrowly the real aspect of the building. its principal feature seemed to be that of an excessive antiquity. the discoloration of ages had been great. minute fungi overspread the whole exterior, hanging in a fine tangled web-work from the eaves. yet all this was apart from any extraordinary dilapidation. no portion of the masonry had fallen; and there appeared to be a wild inconsistency between its still perfect adaptation of parts, and the crumbling condition of the individual stones. in this there was much that reminded me of the specious totality of old wood-work which has rotted for long years in some neglected vault, with no disturbance from the breath of the external air. beyond this indication of extensive decay, however, the fabric gave little token of instability. perhaps the eye of a scrutinising observer might have discovered a barely perceptible fissure, which, extending from the roof of the building in front, made its way down the wall in a zigzag direction, until it became lost in the sullen waters of the tarn.noticing these things, i rode over a short causeway to the house. a servant in waiting took my horse, and i entered the gothic archway of the hall. a valet, of stealthy step, thence conducted me, in silence, through many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio of his master. much that i encountered on the way contributed, i know not how, to heighten the vague sentiments of which i have already spoken. while the objects around me--while the carvings of the ceilings, the sombre tapestries of the walls, the ebon blackness of the floors, and the phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as i strode, were but matters to which, or to such as which, i had been accustomed from my infancy--while i hesitated not to acknowledge how familiar was all this--i still wondered to find how unfamiliar were the fancies which ordinary images were stirring up. on one of the staircases, i met the physician of the family. his countenance, i thought, wore a mingled expression of low cunning and perplexity. he accosted me with trepidation and passed on. the valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the presence of his master.the room in which i found myself was very large and lofty. the windows were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a distance from the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible from within. feeble gleams of encrimson light made their way through the trellised panes, and served to render sufficiently distinct the more prominent objects around the eye, however, struggled in vain to reach the remoter angles of the chamber, or the recesses of the vaulted and fretted ceiling. dark draperies hung upon the walls. the general furniture was profuse, comfortless, antique, and tattered. many books and musical instruments lay scattered about, but failed to give any vitality to the scene. i felt that i breathed an atmosphere of sorrow. an air of stern, deep, and irredeemable gloom hung over and pervaded all.upon my entrance, usher arose from a sofa on which he had been lying at full length, and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much in it, i at first thought, of an overdone cordiality--of the constrained effort of the ennuye man of the world. a glance, however, at his countenance, convinced me of his perfect sincerity. we sat down; and for some moments, while he spoke not, i gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity, half of awe. surely, man had never before so terribly altered, in so brief a period, as had roderick usher! it was with difficulty that i could bring myself to admit the identity of the wan being before me with the companion of my early boyhood. yet the character of his face had been at all times remarkable. a cadaverousness of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and luminous beyond comparison; lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but of a surpassingly beautiful curve; a nose of a delicate hebrew model, but with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations; a finely moulded chin, speaking, in its want of prominence, of a want of moral energy; hair of a more than web-like softness and tenuity; these features, with an inordinate expansion above the regions of the temple, made up altogether a countenance not easily to be forgotten. and now in the mere exaggeration of the prevailing character of these features, and of the expression they were wont to convey, lay so much of change that i doubted to whom i spoke. the now ghastly pallor of the skin, and the now miraculous lustre of the eye, above all things startled and even awed me. the silken hair, too, had been suffered to grow all unheeded, and as, in its wild gossamer texture, it floated rather than fell about the face, i could not, even with effort, connect its arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity.in the manner of my friend i was at once struck with an incoherence --an inconsistency; and i soon found this to arise from a series of feeble and futile struggles to overcome an habitual trepidancy--an excessive nervous agitation. for something of this nature i had indeed been prepared, no less by his letter, than by reminiscences of certain boyish traits, and by conclusions deduced from his peculiar physical conformation and temperament. his action was alternately vivacious and sullen. his voice varied rapidly from a tremulous indecision when the animal spirits seemed utterly in abeyance to that species of energetic concision--that abrupt, weighty, unhurried, and hollow-sounding enunciation--that leaden, self-balanced and perfectly modulated guttural utterance, which may be observed in the lost drunkard, or the irreclaimable eater of opium, during the periods of his most intense excitement.it was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of his earnest desire to see me, and of the solace he expected me to afford him. he entered, at some length, into what he conceived to be the nature of his malady. it was, he said, a constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he despaired to find a remedy--a mere nervous affection, he immediately added, which would undoubtedly soon pass off. it displayed itself in a host of unnatural sensations. some of these, as he detailed them, interested and bewildered me; although, perhaps, the terms, and the general manner of the narration had their weight. he suffered much from a morbid acuteness of the senses; the most insipid food was alone endurable; he could wear only garments of certain texture; the odours of all flowers were oppressive; his eyes were tortured by even a faint light; and there were but peculiar sounds, and these from stringed instruments, which did not inspire him with horror.to an anomalous species of terror i found him a bounden slave. "i shall perish," said he, "i must perish in this deplorable folly. thus, thus, and not otherwise, shall i be lost. i dread the events of the future, not in themselves, but in their results. i shudder at the thought of any, even the most trivial, incident, which may operate upon this intolerable agitation of soul. i have, indeed, no abhorrence of danger, except in its absolute effect--in terror. in this unnerved-in this pitiable condition--i feel that the period will sooner or later arrive when i must abandon life and reason together, in some struggle with the grim phantasm, fear."i learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and equivocal hints, another singular feature of his mental condition. he was enchained by certain superstitious impressions in regard to the dwelling which he tenanted, and whence, for many years, he had never ventured forth--in regard to an influence whose supposititious force was conveyed in terms too shadowy here to be re-stated--an influence which some peculiarities in the mere form and substance of his family mansion, had, by dint of long sufferance, he said, obtained over his spirit-an effect which the physique of the gray walls and turrets, and of the dim tarn into which they all looked down, had, at length, brought about upon the morale of his existence.he admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of the peculiar gloom which thus afflicted him could be traced to a more natural and far more palpable origin--to the severe and long-continued illness--indeed to the evidently approaching dissolution-of a tenderly beloved sister--his sole companion for long years--his last and only relative on earth. "her decease," he said, with a bitterness which i can never forget, "would leave him him the hopeless and the frail the last of the ancient race of the ushers." while he spoke, the lady madeline for so was she called passed slowly through a remote portion of the apartment, and, without having noticed my presence, disappeared. i regarded her with an utter astonishment not unmingled with dread--and yet i found it impossible to account for such feelings. a sensation of stupor oppressed me, as my eyes followed her retreating steps. when a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance sought instinctively and eagerly the countenance of the brother--but he had buried his face in his hands, and i could only perceive that a far more than ordinary wanness had overspread the emaciated fingers through which trickled many passionate tears.the disease of the lady madeline had long baffled the skill of her physicians. a settled apathy, a gradual wasting away of the person, and frequent although transient affections of a partially cataleptical character, were the unusual diagnosis. hitherto she had steadily borne up against the pressure of her malady, and had not betaken herself finally to bed; but, on the closing in of the evening of my arrival at the house, she succumbed as her brother told me at night with inexpressible agitation to the prostrating power of the destroyer; and i learned that the glimpse i had obtained of her person would thus probably be the last i should obtain--that the lady, at least while living, would be seen by me no more.for several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by either usher or myself: and during this period i was busied in earnest endeavours to alleviate the melancholy of my friend. we painted and read together; or i listened, as if in a dream, to the wild improvisations of his speaking guitar. and thus, as a closer and still intimacy admitted me more unreservedly into the recesses of his spirit, the more bitterly did i perceive the futility of all attempt at cheering a mind from which darkness, as if an inherent positive quality, poured forth upon all objects of the moral and physical universe, in one unceasing radiation of gloom.i shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solemn hours i thus spent alone with the master of the house of usher. yet i should fail in any attempt to convey an idea of the exact character of the studies, or of the occupations, in which he involved me, or led me the way. an excited and highly distempered ideality threw a sulphureous lustre over all. his long improvised dirges will ring forever in my cars. among other things, i hold painfully in mind a certain singular perversion and amplification of the wild air of the last waltz of von weber. from the paintings over which his elaborate fancy brooded, and which grew, touch by touch, into vaguenesses at which i shuddered the more thrillingly, because i shuddered knowing not why;--from these paintings vivid as their images now are before me i would in vain endeavour to educe more than a small portion which should lie within the compass of merely written words. by the utter simplicity, by the nakedness of his designs, he arrested and overawed attention. if ever mortal painted an idea, that mortal was roderick usher. for me at least--in the circumstances then surrounding me--there arose out of the pure abstractions which the hypochondriac contrived to throw upon his canvas, an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow of which felt i ever yet in the contemplation of the certainly glowing yet too concrete reveries of fuseli.one of the phantasmagoric conceptions of my friend, partaking not so rigidly of the spirit of abstraction, may be shadowed forth, although feebly, in words. a small picture presented the interior of an immensely long and rectangular vault or tunnel, with low walls, smooth, white, and without interruption or device. certain accessory points of the design served well to convey the idea that this excavation lay at an exceeding depth below the surface of the earth. no outlet was observed in any portion of its vast extent, and no torch, or other artificial source of light was discernible; yet a flood of intense rays rolled throughout, and bathed the whole in a ghastly and inappropriate splendour.i have just spoken of that morbid condition of the auditory nerve which rendered all music intolerable to the sufferer, with the exception of certain effects of stringed instruments. it was, perhaps, the narrow limits to which he thus confined himself upon the guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the fantastic character of his performances. but the fervid facility of his impromptus could not be so accounted for. they must have been, and were, in the notes, as well as in the words of his wild fantasias for he not unfrequently accompanied himself with rhymed verbal improvisations, the result of that intense mental collectedness and concentration to which i have previously alluded as observable only in particular moments of the highest artificial excitement. the words of one of these rhapsodies i have easily remembered. i was, perhaps, the more forcibly impressed with it, as he gave it, because, in the under or mystic current of its meaning, i fancied that i perceived, and for the first time, a full consciousness on the part of usher, of the tottering of his lofty reason upon her throne. the verses, which were entitled "the haunted palace," ran very nearly, if not accurately, thus:i. in the greenest of our valleys, by good angels tenanted, once fair and stately palace-- radiant palace--reared its head. in the monarch thought's dominion-- it stood there! never seraph spread a pinion over fabric half so fair.  ii. banners yellow, glorious, golden, on its roof did float and flow; (this--all this--was in the olden time long ago); and every gentle air that dallied, in that sweet day, along the ramparts plumed and pallid, a winged odour went away.  iii. wanderers in that happy valley through two luminous windows saw spirits moving musically to a lute's well-tuned law, round about a throne, where sitting (porphyrogene!) in state his glory well befitting, the ruler of the realm was seen.  iv. and all with pearl and ruby glowing was the fair palace door, through which came flowing, flowing, flowing and sparkling evermore, a troop of echoes whose sweet duty was but to sing, in voices of surpassing beauty, the wit and wisdom of their king.  v. but evil things, in robes of sorrow, assailed the monarch's high estate; (ah, let us mourn, for never morrow shall dawn upon him, desolate!) and, round about his home, the glory that blushed and bloomed is but a dim-remembered story of the old time entombed.  vi. and travellers now within that valley, through the red-litten windows, see vast forms that move fantastically to a discordant melody; while, like a rapid ghastly river, through the pale door, a hideous throng rush out forever, and laugh--but smile no more.i well remember that suggestions arising from this ballad led us into a train of thought wherein there became manifest an opinion of usher's which i mention not so much on account of its novelty, for other men have thought thus, as on account of the pertinacity with which he maintained it. this opinion, in its general form, was that of the sentience of all vegetable things. but, in his disordered fancy, the idea had assumed a more daring character, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon the kingdom of inorganization. i lack words to express the full extent, or the earnest abandon of his persuasion. the belief, however, was connected as i have previously hinted with the gray stones of the home of his forefathers. the conditions of the sentience had been here, he imagined, fulfilled in the method of collocation of these stones--in the order of their arrangement, as well as in that of the many fungi which overspread them, and of the decayed trees which stood around--above all, in the long undisturbed endurance of this arrangement, and in its reduplication in the still waters of the tarn. its evidence--the evidence of the sentience--was to be seen, he said, and i here started as he spoke, in the gradual yet certain condensation of an atmosphere of their own about the waters and the walls. the result was discoverable, he added, in that silent, yet importunate and terrible influence which for centuries had moulded the destinies of his family, and which made him what i now saw him--what he was. such opinions need no comment, and i will make none.our books--the books which, for years, had formed no small portion of the mental existence of the invalid--were, as might be supposed, in strict keeping with this character of phantasm. we pored together over such works as the ververt et chartreuse of gresset; the belphegor of machiavelli; the heaven and hell of swedenborg; the subterranean voyage of nicholas klimm by holberg; the chiromancy of robert flud, of jean d'indagine, and of de la chambre; the journey into the blue distance of tieck; and the city of the sun of campanella. one favourite volume was a small octavo edition of the directorium inquisitorum, by the dominican eymeric de gironne; and there were passages in pomponius_mela, about the old african satyrs and aegipans, over which usher would sit dreaming for hours. his chief delight, however, was found in the perusal of an exceedingly rare and curious book in quarto gothic--the manual of a forgotten church--the vigilae mortuorum secundum chorum ecclesiae maguntinae.i could not help thinking of the wild ritual of this work, and of its probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one evening, having informed me abruptly that the lady madeline was no more, he stated his intention of preserving her corpse for a fortnight, previously to its final interment, in one of the numerous vaults within the main walls of the building. the worldly reason, however, assigned for this singular proceeding, was one which i did not feel at liberty to dispute. the brother had been led to his resolution so he told me by consideration of the unusual character of the malady of the deceased, of certain obtrusive and eager inquiries on the part of her medical men, and of the remote and exposed situation of the burial-ground of the family. i will not deny that when i called to mind the sinister countenance of the person whom i met upon the stair case, on the day of my arrival at the house, i had no desire to oppose what i regarded as at best but a harmless, and by no means an unnatural, precaution.at the request of usher, i personally aided him in the arrangements for the temporary entombment. the body having been encoffined, we two alone bore it to its rest. the vault in which we placed it and which had been so long unopened that our torches, half smothered in its oppressive atmosphere, gave us little opportunity for investigation was small, damp, and entirely without means of admission for light; lying, at great depth, immediately beneath that portion of the building in which was my own sleeping apartment. it had been used, apparently, in remote feudal times, for the worst purposes of a donjon-keep, and, in later days, as a place of deposit for powder, or some other highly combustible substance, as a portion of its floor, and the whole interior of a long archway through which we reached it, were carefully sheathed with copper. the door, of massive iron, had been, also, similarly protected. its immense weight caused an unusually sharp grating sound, as it moved upon its hinges.having deposited our mournful burden upon tressels within this region of horror, we partially turned aside the yet unscrewed lid of the coffin, and looked upon the face of the tenant. a striking similitude between the brother and sister now first arrested my attention; and usher, divining, perhaps, my thoughts, murmured out some few words from which i learned that the deceased and himself had been twins, and that sympathies of a scarcely intelligible nature had always existed between them. our glances, however, rested not long upon the dead--for we could not regard her unawed. the disease which had thus entombed the lady in the maturity of youth, had left, as usual in all maladies of a strictly cataleptical character, the mockery of a faint blush upon the bosom and the face, and that suspiciously lingering smile upon the lip which is so terrible in death. we replaced and screwed down the lid, and, having secured the door of iron, made our way, with toll, into the scarcely less gloomy apartments of the upper portion of the house.and now, some days of bitter grief having elapsed, an observable change came over the features of the mental disorder of my friend. his ordinary manner had vanished. his ordinary occupations were neglected or forgotten. he roamed from chamber to chamber with hurried, unequal, and objectless step. the pallor of his countenance had assumed, if possible, a more ghastly hue--but the luminousness of his eye had utterly gone out. the once occasional huskiness of his tone was heard no more; and a tremulous quaver, as if of extreme terror, habitually characterized his utterance. there were times, indeed, when i thought his unceasingly agitated mind was labouring with some oppressive secret, to divulge which he struggled for the necessary courage. at times, again, i was obliged to resolve all into the mere inexplicable vagaries of madness, for i beheld him gazing upon vacancy for long hours, in an attitude of the profoundest attention, as if listening to some imaginary sound. it was no wonder that his condition terrified-that it infected me. i felt creeping upon me, by slow yet certain degrees, the wild influences of his own fantastic yet impressive superstitions.it was, especially, upon retiring to bed late in the night of the seventh or eighth day after the placing of the lady madeline within the donjon, that i experienced the full power of such feelings. sleep came not near my couch--while the hours waned and waned away. i struggled to reason off the nervousness which had dominion over me. i endeavoured to believe that much, if not all of what i felt, was due to the bewildering influence of the gloomy furniture of the room--of the dark and tattered draperies, which, tortured into motion by the breath of a rising tempest, swayed fitfully to and fro upon the walls, and rustled uneasily about the decorations of the bed. but my efforts were fruitless. an irrepressible tremour gradually pervaded my frame; and, at length, there sat upon my very heart an incubus of utterly causeless alarm. shaking this off with a gasp and a struggle, i uplifted myself upon the pillows, and, peering earnestly within the intense darkness of the chamber, hearkened--i know not why, except that an instinctive spirit prompted me--to certain low and indefinite sounds which came, through the pauses of the storm, at long intervals, i knew not whence. overpowered by an intense sentiment of horror, unaccountable yet unendurable, i threw on my clothes with haste for i felt that i should sleep no more during the night, and endeavoured to arouse myself from the pitiable condition into which i had fallen, by pacing rapidly to and fro through the apartment.i had taken but few turns in this manner, when a light step on an adjoining staircase arrested my attention. i presently recognised it as that of usher. in an instant afterward he rapped, with a gentle touch, at my door, and entered, bearing a lamp. his countenance was, as usual, cadaverously wan--but, moreover, there was a species of mad hilarity in his eyes--an evidently restrained hysteria in his whole demeanour. his air appalled me--but anything was preferable to the solitude which i had so long endured, and i even welcomed his presence as a relief."and you have not seen it?" he said abruptly, after having stared about him for some moments in silence--"you have not then seen it?--but, stay! you shall." thus speaking, and having carefully shaded his lamp, he hurried to one of the casements, and threw it freely open to the storm.the impetuous fury of the entering gust nearly lifted us from our feet. it was, indeed, a tempestuous yet sternly beautiful night, and one wildly singular in its terror and its beauty. a whirlwind had apparently collected its force in our vicinity; for there were frequent and violent alterations in the direction of the wind; and the exceeding density of the clouds which hung so low as to press upon the turrets of the house did not prevent our perceiving the life-like velocity with which they flew careering from all points against each other, without passing away into the distance. i say that even their exceeding density did not prevent our perceiving this--yet we had no glimpse of the moon or stars--nor was there any flashing forth of the lightning. but the under surfaces of the huge masses of agitated vapour, as well as all terrestrial objects immediately around us, were glowing in the unnatural light of a faintly luminous and distinctly visible gaseous exhalation which hung about and enshrouded the mansion."you must not--you shall not behold this!" said i, shudderingly, to usher, as i led him, with a gentle violence, from the window to a seat. "these appearances, which bewilder you, are merely electrical phenomena not uncommon--or it may be that they have their ghastly origin in the rank miasma of the tarn. let us close this casement;--the air is chilling and dangerous to your frame. here is one of your favourite romances. i will read, and you shall listen;--and so we will pass away this terrible night together."the antique volume which i had taken up was the "mad trist" of sir launcelot canning; but i had called it a favourite of usher's more in sad jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there is little in its uncouth and unimaginative prolixity which could have had interest for the lofty and spiritual ideality of my friend. it was, however, the only book immediately at hand; and i indulged a vague hope that the excitement which now agitated the hypochondriac, might find relief for the history of mental disorder is full of similar anomalies even in the extremeness of the folly which i should read. could i have judged, indeed, by the wild over-strained air of vivacity with which he hearkened, or apparently hearkened, to the words of the tale, i might well have congratulated myself upon the success of my design.i had arrived at that well-known portion of the story where ethelred, the hero of the trist, having sought in vain for peaceable admission into the dwelling of the hermit, proceeds to make good an entrance by force. here, it will be remembered, the words of the narrative run thus:"and ethelred, who was by nature of a doughty heart, and who was now mighty withal, on account of the powerfulness of the wine which he had drunken, waited no longer to hold parley with the hermit, who, in sooth, was of an obstinate and maliceful turn, but, feeling the rain upon his shoulders, and fearing the rising of the tempest, uplifted his mace outright, and, with blows, made quickly room in the plankings of the door for his gauntleted hand; and now pulling there-with sturdily, he so cracked, and ripped, and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry and hollow-sounding wood alarumed and reverberated throughout the forest."at the termination of this sentence i started, and for a moment, paused; for it appeared to me although i at once concluded that my excited fancy had deceived me--it appeared to me that, from some very remote portion of the mansion, there came, indistinctly, to my ears, what might have been, in its exact similarity of character, the echo but a stifled and dull one certainly of the very cracking and ripping sound which sir launcelot had so particularly described. it was, beyond doubt, the coincidence alone which had arrested my attention; for, amid the rattling of the sashes of the casements, and the ordinary commingled noises of the still increasing storm, the sound, in itself, had nothing, surely, which should have interested or disturbed me. i  continued the story:"but the good champion ethelred, now entering within the door, was sore enraged and amazed to perceive no signal of the maliceful hermit; but, in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scaly and prodigious demeanour, and of a fiery tongue, which sate in guard before a palace of gold, with a floor of silver; and upon the wall there hung a shield of shining brass with this legend enwritten--who entereth herein, a conqueror hath bin; who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win.and ethelred uplifted his mace, and struck upon the head of the dragon, which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, with a shriek so horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, that ethelred had fain to close his ears with his hands against the dreadful noise of it, the like whereof was never before heard."here again i paused abruptly, and now with a feeling of wild amazement--for there could be no doubt whatever that, in this instance, i did actually  hear although from what direction it proceeded i found it impossible to say a low and apparently distant, but harsh, protracted, and most unusual screaming or grating sound--the exact counterpart of what my fancy had already conjured up for the dragon's unnatural shriek as described by the romancer.oppressed, as i certainly was, upon the occurrence of the second and most extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand conflicting sensations, in which wonder and extreme terror were predominant, i still retained sufficient presence of mind to avoid exciting, by any observation, the sensitive nervousness of my companion. i was by no means certain that he had noticed the sounds in question; although, assuredly, a strange alteration had, during the last few minutes, taken place in his demeanour. from a position fronting my own, he had gradually brought round his chair, so as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber; and thus i could but partially perceive his features, although i saw that his lips trembled as if he were murmuring inaudibly. his head had dropped upon his breast--yet i knew that he was not asleep, from the wide and rigid opening of the eye as i caught a glance of it in profile. the motion of his body, too, was at variance with this idea--for he rocked from side to side with a gentle yet constant and uniform sway. having rapidly taken notice of all this, i resumed the narrative of sir launcelot, which thus proceeded:"and now, the champion, having escaped from the terrible fury of the dragon, bethinking himself of the brazen shield, and of the breaking up of the enchantment which was upon it, removed the carcass from out of the way before him, and approached valorously over the silver pavement of the castle to where the shield was upon the wall; which in sooth tarried not for his full coming, but fell down at his feet upon the silver floor, with a mighty great and terrible ringing sound."no sooner had these syllables passed my lips, than--as if a shield of brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavily upon a floor of silver became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, and clangorous, yet apparently muffled reverberation. completely unnerved, i leaped to my feet; but the measured rocking movement of usher was undisturbed. i rushed to the chair in which he sat. his eyes were bent fixedly before him, and throughout his whole countenance there reigned a stony rigidity. but, as i placed my hand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder over his whole person; a sickly smile quivered about his lips; and i saw that he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibbering murmur, as if unconscious of my presence. bending closely over him, i at length drank in the hideous import of his words."now hear it?--yes, i hear it, and have heard it. long--long --long--many minutes, many hours, many days, have i heard it--yet i dared not--oh, pity me, miserable wretch that i am!--i dared not--i dared not speak! we have put her living in the tomb! said i not that my senses were acute? i now tell you that i heard her first feeble movements in the hollow coffin. i heard them--many, many days ago--yet i dared not--i dared not speak! and now--to-night--ethelred--ha! ha!--the breaking of the hermit's door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangour of the shield!--say, rather, the rending of her coffin, and the grating of the iron hinges of her prison, and her struggles within the coppered archway of the vault! oh whither shall i fly? will she not be here anon? is she not hurrying to upbraid me for my haste? have i not heard her footstep on the stair? do i not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her heart? madman!"; here he sprang furiously to his feet, and shrieked out his syllables, as if in the effort he were giving up his soul--"madman! i tell you that she now stands without the door!"as if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had been found the potency of a spell--the huge antique panels to which the speaker pointed, threw slowly back, upon the instant, ponderous and ebony jaws. it was the work of the rushing gust--but then without those doors there did stand the lofty and enshrouded figure of the lady madeline of usher. there was blood upon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter struggle upon every portion of her emaciated frame. for a moment she remained trembling and reeling to and fro upon the threshold, then, with a low moaning cry, fell heavily inward upon the person of her brother, and in her violent and now final death-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim to the terrors he had anticipated.from that chamber, and from that mansion, i fled aghast. the storm was still abroad in all its wrath as i found myself crossing the old causeway. suddenly there shot along the path a wild light, and i turned to see whence a gleam so unusual could have issued; for the vast house and its shadows were alone behind me. the radiance was that of the full, setting, and blood-red moon which now shone vividly through that once barely-discernible fissure of which i have before spoken as extending from the roof of the building, in a zigzag direction, to the base. while i gazed, this fissure rapidly widened--there came a fierce breath of the whirlwind--the entire orb of the satellite burst at once upon my sight--my brain reeled as i saw the mighty walls rushing asunder--there was a long tumultuous shouting sound like the voice of a thousand waters--and the deep and dank tarn at my feet closed sullenly and silently over the fragments of the "house of usher."-the end-in the consideration of the faculties and impulses -- of the prima mobilia of the human soul, the phrenologists have failed to make room for a propensity which, although obviously existing as a radical, primitive, irreducible sentiment, has been equally overlooked by all the moralists who have preceded them. in the pure arrogance of the reason, we have all overlooked it. we have suffered its existence to escape our senses, solely through want of belief -- of faith; -- whether it be faith in revelation, or faith in the kabbala. the idea of it has never occurred to us, simply because of its supererogation. we saw no need of the impulse -- for the propensity. we could not perceive its necessity. we could not understand, that is to say, we could not have understood, had the notion of this primum mobile ever obtruded itself; -- we could not have understood in what manner it might be made to further the objects of humanity, either temporal or eternal. it cannot be denied that phrenology and, in great measure, all metaphysicianism have been concocted a priori. the intellectual or logical man, rather than the understanding or observant man, set himself to imagine designs -- to dictate purposes to god. having thus fathomed, to his satisfaction, the intentions of jehovah, out of these intentions he built his innumerable systems of mind. in the matter of phrenology, for example, we first determined, naturally enough, that it was the design of the deity that man should eat. we then assigned to man an organ of alimentiveness, and this organ is the scourge with which the deity compels man, will-i nill-i, into eating. secondly, having settled it to be god's will that man should continue his species, we discovered an organ of amativeness, forthwith. and so with combativeness, with ideality, with causality, with constructiveness, -- so, in short, with every organ, whether representing a propensity, a moral sentiment, or a faculty of the pure intellect. and in these arrangements of the principia of human action, the spurzheimites, whether right or wrong, in part, or upon the whole, have but followed, in principle, the footsteps of their predecessors: deducing and establishing every thing from the preconceived destiny of man, and upon the ground of the objects of his creator.it would have been wiser, it would have been safer, to classify (if classify we must) upon the basis of what man usually or occasionally did, and was always occasionally doing, rather than upon the basis of what we took it for granted the deity intended him to do. if we cannot comprehend god in his visible works, how then in his inconceivable thoughts, that call the works into being? if we cannot understand him in his objective creatures, how then in his substantive moods and phases of creation?induction, a posteriori, would have brought phrenology to admit, as an innate and primitive principle of human action, a paradoxical something, which we may call perverseness, for want of a more characteristic term. in the sense i intend, it is, in fact, a mobile without motive, a motive not motivirt. through its promptings we act without comprehensible object; or, if this shall be understood as a contradiction in terms, we may so far modify the proposition as to say, that through its promptings we act, for the reason that we should not. in theory, no reason can be more unreasonable, but, in fact, there is none more strong. with certain minds, under certain conditions, it becomes absolutely irresistible. i am not more certain that i breathe, than that the assurance of the wrong or error of any action is often the one unconquerable force which impels us, and alone impels us to its prosecution. nor will this overwhelming tendency to do wrong for the wrong's sake, admit of analysis, or resolution into ulterior elements. it is a radical, a primitive impulse-elementary. it will be said, i am aware, that when we persist in acts because we feel we should not persist in them, our conduct is but a modification of that which ordinarily springs from the combativeness of phrenology. but a glance will show the fallacy of this idea. the phrenological combativeness has for its essence, the necessity of self-defence. it is our safeguard against injury. its principle regards our well-being; and thus the desire to be well is excited simultaneously with its development. it follows, that the desire to be well must be excited simultaneously with any principle which shall be merely a modification of combativeness, but in the case of that something which i term perverseness, the desire to be well is not only not aroused, but a strongly antagonistical sentiment exists.an appeal to one's own heart is, after all, the best reply to the sophistry just noticed. no one who trustingly consults and thoroughly questions his own soul, will be disposed to deny the entire radicalness of the propensity in question. it is not more incomprehensible than distinctive. there lives no man who at some period has not been tormented, for example, by an earnest desire to tantalize a listener by circumlocution. the speaker is aware that he displeases; he has every intention to please, he is usually curt, precise, and clear, the most laconic and luminous language is struggling for utterance upon his tongue, it is only with difficulty that he restrains himself from giving it flow; he dreads and deprecates the anger of him whom he addresses; yet, the thought strikes him, that by certain involutions and parentheses this anger may be engendered. that single thought is enough. the impulse increases to a wish, the wish to a desire, the desire to an uncontrollable longing, and the longing (to the deep regret and mortification of the speaker, and in defiance of all consequences) is indulged.we have a task before us which must be speedily performed. we know that it will be ruinous to make delay. the most important crisis of our life calls, trumpet-tongued, for immediate energy and action. we glow, we are consumed with eagerness to commence the work, with the anticipation of whose glorious result our whole souls are on fire. it must, it shall be undertaken to-day, and yet we put it off until to-morrow, and why? there is no answer, except that we feel perverse, using the word with no comprehension of the principle. to-morrow arrives, and with it a more impatient anxiety to do our duty, but with this very increase of anxiety arrives, also, a nameless, a positively fearful, because unfathomable, craving for delay. this craving gathers strength as the moments fly. the last hour for action is at hand. we tremble with the violence of the conflict within us, -- of the definite with the indefinite -- of the substance with the shadow. but, if the contest have proceeded thus far, it is the shadow which prevails, -- we struggle in vain. the clock strikes, and is the knell of our welfare. at the same time, it is the chanticleer -- note to the ghost that has so long overawed us. it flies -- it disappears -- we are free. the old energy returns. we will labor now. alas, it is too late!we stand upon the brink of a precipice. we peer into the abyss -- we grow sick and dizzy. our first impulse is to shrink from the danger. unaccountably we remain. by slow degrees our sickness and dizziness and horror become merged in a cloud of unnamable feeling. by gradations, still more imperceptible, this cloud assumes shape, as did the vapor from the bottle out of which arose the genius in the arabian nights. but out of this our cloud upon the precipice's edge, there grows into palpability, a shape, far more terrible than any genius or any demon of a tale, and yet it is but a thought, although a fearful one, and one which chills the very marrow of our bones with the fierceness of the delight of its horror. it is merely the idea of what would be our sensations during the sweeping precipitancy of a fall from such a height. and this fall -- this rushing annihilation -- for the very reason that it involves that one most ghastly and loathsome of all the most ghastly and loathsome images of death and suffering which have ever presented themselves to our imagination -- for this very cause do we now the most vividly desire it. and because our reason violently deters us from the brink, therefore do we the most impetuously approach it. there is no passion in nature so demoniacally impatient, as that of him who, shuddering upon the edge of a precipice, thus meditates a plunge. to indulge, for a moment, in any attempt at thought, is to be inevitably lost; for reflection but urges us to forbear, and therefore it is, i say, that we cannot. if there be no friendly arm to check us, or if we fail in a sudden effort to prostrate ourselves backward from the abyss, we plunge, and are destroyed.examine these similar actions as we will, we shall find them resulting solely from the spirit of the perverse. we perpetrate them because we feel that we should not. beyond or behind this there is no intelligible principle; and we might, indeed, deem this perverseness a direct instigation of the arch-fiend, were it not occasionally known to operate in furtherance of good.i have said thus much, that in some measure i may answer your question, that i may explain to you why i am here, that i may assign to you something that shall have at least the faint aspect of a cause for my wearing these fetters, and for my tenanting this cell of the condemned. had i not been thus prolix, you might either have misunderstood me altogether, or, with the rabble, have fancied me mad. as it is, you will easily perceive that i am one of the many uncounted victims of the imp of the perverse.it is impossible that any deed could have been wrought with a more thorough deliberation. for weeks, for months, i pondered upon the means of the murder. i rejected a thousand schemes, because their accomplishment involved a chance of detection. at length, in reading some french memoirs, i found an account of a nearly fatal illness that occurred to madame pilau, through the agency of a candle accidentally poisoned. the idea struck my fancy at once. i knew my victim's habit of reading in bed. i knew, too, that his apartment was narrow and ill-ventilated. but i need not vex you with impertinent details. i need not describe the easy artifices by which i substituted, in his bed-room candle-stand, a wax-light of my own making for the one which i there found. the next morning he was discovered dead in his bed, and the coroner's verdict was -- "death by the visitation of god."having inherited his estate, all went well with me for years. the idea of detection never once entered my brain. of the remains of the fatal taper i had myself carefully disposed. i had left no shadow of a clew by which it would be possible to convict, or even to suspect me of the crime. it is inconceivable how rich a sentiment of satisfaction arose in my bosom as i reflected upon my absolute security. for a very long period of time i was accustomed to revel in this sentiment. it afforded me more real delight than all the mere worldly advantages accruing from my sin. but there arrived at length an epoch, from which the pleasurable feeling grew, by scarcely perceptible gradations, into a haunting and harassing thought. it harassed because it haunted. i could scarcely get rid of it for an instant. it is quite a common thing to be thus annoyed with the ringing in our ears, or rather in our memories, of the burthen of some ordinary song, or some unimpressive snatches from an opera. nor will we be the less tormented if the song in itself be good, or the opera air meritorious. in this manner, at last, i would perpetually catch myself pondering upon my security, and repeating, in a low undertone, the phrase, "i am safe."one day, whilst sauntering along the streets, i arrested myself in the act of murmuring, half aloud, these customary syllables. in a fit of petulance, i remodelled them thus; "i am safe -- i am safe -- yes -- if i be not fool enough to make open confession!"no sooner had i spoken these words, than i felt an icy chill creep to my heart. i had had some experience in these fits of perversity, (whose nature i have been at some trouble to explain), and i remembered well that in no instance i had successfully resisted their attacks. and now my own casual self-suggestion that i might possibly be fool enough to confess the murder of which i had been guilty, confronted me, as if the very ghost of him whom i had murdered -- and beckoned me on to death.at first, i made an effort to shake off this nightmare of the soul. i walked vigorously -- faster -- still faster -- at length i ran. i felt a maddening desire to shriek aloud. every succeeding wave of thought overwhelmed me with new terror, for, alas! i well, too well understood that to think, in my situation, was to be lost. i still quickened my pace. i bounded like a madman through the crowded thoroughfares. at length, the populace took the alarm, and pursued me. i felt then the consummation of my fate. could i have torn out my tongue, i would have done it, but a rough voice resounded in my ears -- a rougher grasp seized me by the shoulder. i turned -- i gasped for breath. for a moment i experienced all the pangs of suffocation; i became blind, and deaf, and giddy; and then some invisible fiend, i thought, struck me with his broad palm upon the back. the long imprisoned secret burst forth from my soul.they say that i spoke with a distinct enunciation, but with marked emphasis and passionate hurry, as if in dread of interruption before concluding the brief, but pregnant sentences that consigned me to the hangman and to hell.having related all that was necessary for the fullest judicial conviction, i fell prostrate in a swoon.but why shall i say more? to-day i wear these chains, and am here! to-morrow i shall be fetterless! -- but where?the red death had long devastated the country. no pestilence had ever been so fatal, or so hideous. blood was its avatar and its seal--the madness and the horror of blood. there were sharp pains, and sudden dizziness, and then profuse bleeding at the pores, with dissolution. the scarlet stains upon the body and especially upon the face of the victim, were the pest ban which shut him out from the aid and from the sympathy of his fellow-men. and the whole seizure, progress, and termination of the disease, were incidents of half an hour.but prince prospero was happy and dauntless and sagacious. when his dominions were half depopulated, he summoned to his presence a thousand hale and light-hearted friends from among the knights and dames of his court, and with these retired to the deep seclusion of one of his crenellated abbeys. this was an extensive and magnificent structure, the creation of the prince's own eccentric yet august taste. a strong and lofty wall girdled it in. this wall had gates of iron. the courtiers, having entered, brought furnaces and massy hammers and welded the bolts.they resolved to leave means neither of ingress nor egress to the sudden impulses of despair or of frenzy from within. the abbey was amply provisioned. with such precautions the courtiers might bid defiance to contagion. the external world could take care of itself. in the meantime it was folly to grieve or to think. the prince had provided all the appliances of pleasure. there were buffoons, there were improvisatori, there were ballet-dancers, there were musicians, there was beauty, there was wine. all these and security were within. without was the "red death."it was toward the close of the fifth or sixth month of his seclusion that the prince prospero entertained his thousand friends at a masked ball of the most unusual magnificence.it was a voluptuous scene, that masquerade. but first let me tell of the rooms in which it was held. there were seven--an imperial suite, in many palaces, however, such suites form a long and straight vista, while the folding doors slide back nearly to the walls on either hand, so that the view of the whole extant is scarcely impeded. here the case was very different; as might have been expected from the duke's love of the "bizarre." the apartments were so irregularly disposed that the vision embraced but little more than one at a time. there was a sharp turn at the right and left, in the middle of each wall, a tall and narrow gothic window looked out upon a closed corridor of which pursued the windings of the suite. these windows were of stained glass whose color varied in accordance with the prevailing hue of the decorations of the chamber into which it opened. that at the eastern extremity was hung, for example, in blue--and vividly blue were its windows. the second chamber was purple in its ornaments and tapestries, and here the panes were purple. the third was green throughout, and so were the casements. the fourth was furnished and lighted with orange--the fifth with white--the sixth with violet. the seventh apartment was closely shrouded in black velvet tapestries that hung all over the ceiling and down the walls, falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same material and hue. but in this chamber only, the color of the windows failed to correspond with the decorations. the panes were scarlet--a deep blood color. now in no one of any of the seven apartments was there any lamp or candelabrum, amid the profusion of golden ornaments that lay scattered to and fro and depended from the roof. there was no light of any kind emanating from lamp or candle within the suite of chambers. but in the corridors that followed the suite, there stood, opposite each window, a heavy tripod, bearing a brazier of fire, that projected its rays through the tinted glass and so glaringly lit the room. and thus were produced a multitude of gaudy and fantastic appearances. but in the western or back chamber the effect of the fire-light that streamed upon the dark hangings through the blood-tinted panes was ghastly in the extreme, and produced so wild a look upon the countenances of those who entered, that there were few of the company bold enough to set foot within its precincts at all. it was within this apartment, also, that there stood against the western wall, a gigantic clock of ebony. it pendulum swung to and fro with a dull, heavy, monotonous clang; and when the minute-hand made the circuit of the face, and the hour was to be stricken, there came from the brazen lungs of the clock a sound which was clear and loud and deep and exceedingly musical, but of so peculiar a note and emphasis that, at each lapse of an hour, the musicians of the orchestra were constrained to pause, momentarily, in their performance, to hearken to the sound; and thus the waltzers perforce ceased their evolutions; and there was a brief disconcert of the whole gay company; and while the chimes of the clock yet rang. it was observed that the giddiest grew pale, and the more aged and sedate passed their hands over their brows as if in confused revery or meditation. but when the echoes had fully ceased, a light laughter at once pervaded the assembly; the musicians looked at each other and smiled as if at their own nervousness and folly, and made whispering vows, each to the other, that the next chiming of the clock should produce in them no similar emotion; and then, after the lapse of sixty minutes which embrace three thousand and six hundred seconds of time that flies, there came yet another chiming of the clock, and then were the same disconcert and tremulousness and meditation as before.but, in spite of these things, it was a gay and magnificent revel. the tastes of the duke were peculiar. he had a fine eye for color and effects. he disregarded the "decora" of mere fashion. his plans were bold and fiery, and his conceptions glowed with barbaric lustre. there are some who would have thought him mad. his followers felt that he was not. it was necessary to hear and see and touch him to be _sure_ he was not.he had directed, in great part, the movable embellishments of the seven chambers, upon occasion of this great fete; and it was his own guiding taste which had given character to the masqueraders. be sure they were grotesque. there were much glare and glitter and piquancy and phantasm--much of what has been seen in "hernani." there were arabesque figures with unsuited limbs and appointments. there were delirious fancies such as the madman fashions. there were much of the beautiful, much of the wanton, much of the bizarre, something of the terrible, and not a little of that which might have excited disgust. to and fro in the seven chambers stalked, in fact, a multitude of dreams. and these the dreams--writhed in and about, taking hue from the rooms, and causing the wild music of the orchestra to seem as the echo of their steps. and, anon, there strikes the ebony clock which stands in the hall of the velvet. and then, for a moment, all is still, and all is silent save the voice of the clock. the dreams are stiff-frozen as they stand. but the echoes of the chime die away--they have endured but an instant--and a light half-subdued laughter floats after them as they depart. and now the music swells, and the dreams live, and writhe to and fro more merrily than ever, taking hue from the many-tinted windows through which stream the rays of the tripods. but to the chamber which lies most westwardly of the seven there are now none of the maskers who venture, for the night is waning away; and there flows a ruddier light through the blood-colored panes; and the blackness of the sable drapery appalls; and to him whose foot falls on the sable carpet, there comes from the near clock of ebony a muffled peal more solemnly emphatic than any which reaches _their_ ears who indulge in the more remote gaieties of the other apartments.but these other apartments were densely crowded, and in them beat feverishly the heart of life. and the revel went whirlingly on, until at length there commenced the sounding of midnight upon the clock. and then the music ceased, as i have told; and the evolutions of the waltzers were quieted; and there was an uneasy cessation of all things as before. but now there were twelve strokes to be sounded by the bell of the clock; and thus it happened, perhaps that more of thought crept, with more of time into the meditations of the thoughtful among those who revelled. and thus too, it happened, that before the last echoes of the last chime had utterly sunk into silence, there were many individuals in the crowd who had found leisure to become aware of the presence of a masked figure which had arrested the attention of no single individual before. and the rumor of this new presence having spread itself whisperingly around, there arose at length from the whole company a buzz, or murmur, of horror, and of disgust.in an assembly of phantasms such as i have painted, it may well be supposed that no ordinary appearance could have excited such sensation. in truth the masquerade license of the night was nearly unlimited; but the figure in question had out-heroded herod, and gone beyond the bounds of even the prince's indefinite decorum. there are chords in the hearts of the most reckless which cannot be touched without emotion. even with the utterly lost, to whom life and death are equally jests, there are matters of which no jest can be made. the whole company, indeed, seemed now deeply to feel that in the costume and bearing of the stranger neither wit nor propriety existed. the figure was tall and gaunt, and shrouded from head to foot in the habiliments of the grave. the mask which concealed the visage was made so nearly to resemble the countenance of a stiffened corpse that the closest scrutiny must have difficulty in detecting the cheat. and yet all this might have been endured, if not approved, by the mad revellers around. but the mummer had gone so far as to assume the type of the red death. his vesture was dabbled in _blood_--and his broad brow, with all the features of his face, was besprinkled with the scarlet horror.when the eyes of prince prospero fell on this spectral image which, with a slow and solemn movement, as if more fully to sustain its role, stalked to and fro among the waltzers he was seen to be convulsed, in the first moment with a strong shudder either of terror or distaste; but in the next, his brow reddened with rage."who dares"--he demanded hoarsely of the courtiers who stood near him--"who dares insult us with this blasphemous mockery? seize him and unmask him--that we may know whom we have to hang, at sunrise, from the battlements!"it was in the eastern or blue chamber in which stood prince prospero as he uttered these words. they rang throughout the seven rooms loudly and clearly, for the prince was a bold and robust man, and the music had become hushed at the waving of his hand.it was in the blue room where stood the prince, with a group of pale courtiers by his side. at first, as he spoke, there was a slight rushing movement of this group in the direction of the intruder, who, at the moment was also near at hand, and now, with deliberate and stately step, made closer approach to the speaker. but from a certain nameless awe with which the mad assumptions of the mummer had inspired the whole party, there were found none who put forth a hand to seize him; so that, unimpeded, he passed within a yard of the prince's person; and while the vast assembly, as with one impulse, shrank from the centers of the rooms to the walls, he made his way uninterruptedly, but with the same solemn and measured step which had distinguished him from the first, through the blue chamber to the purple--to the purple to the green--through the green to the orange--through this again to the white--and even thence to the violet, ere a decided movement had been made to arrest him. it was then, however, that the prince prospero, maddened with rage and the shame of his own momentary cowardice, rushed hurriedly through the six chambers, while none followed him on account of a deadly terror that had seized upon all. he bore aloft a drawn dagger, and had approached, in rapid impetuosity, to within three or four feet of the retreating figure, when the latter, having attained the extremity of the velvet apartment, turned suddenly and confronted his pursuer. there was a sharp cry--and the dagger dropped gleaming upon the sable carpet, upon which most instantly afterward, fell prostrate in death the prince prospero. then summoning the wild courage of despair, a throng of the revellers at once threw themselves into the black apartment, and seizing the mummer whose tall figure stood erect and motionless within the shadow of the ebony clock, gasped in unutterable horror at finding the grave cerement and corpse-like mask, which they handled with so violent a rudeness, untenanted by any tangible form.and now was acknowledged the presence of the red death. he had come like a thief in the night. and one by one dropped the revellers in the blood-bedewed halls of their revel, and died each in the despairing posture of his fall. and the life of the ebony clock went out with that of the last of the gay. and the flames of the tripods expired. and darkness and decay and the red death held illimitable dominion over all.whatever doubt may still envelop the rationale of mesmerism, its startling facts are now almost universally admitted. of these latter, those who doubt, are your mere doubters by profession - an unprofitable and disreputable tribe. there can be no more absolute waste of time than the attempt to prove, at the present day, that man, by mere exercise of will, can so impress his fellow, as to cast him into an abnormal condition, of which the phenomena resemble very closely those of death, or at least resemble them more nearly than they do the phenomena of any other normal condition within our cognizance; that, while in this state, the person so impressed employs only with effort, and then feebly, the external organs of sense, yet perceives, with keenly refined perception, and through channels supposed unknown, matters beyond the scope of the physical organs; that, moreover, his intellectual faculties are wonderfully exalted and invigorated; that his sympathies with the person so impressing him are profound; and, finally, that his susceptibility to the impression increases with its frequency, while, in the same proportion, the peculiar phenomena elicited are more extended and more pronounced.i say that these - which are the laws of mesmerism in its general features - it would be supererogation to demonstrate; nor shall i inflict upon my readers so needless a demonstration; to-day. my purpose at present is a very different one indeed. i am impelled, even in the teeth of a world of prejudice, to detail without comment the very remarkable substance of a colloquy, occurring between a sleep-waker and myself.i had been long in the habit of mesmerizing the person in question, (mr. vankirk,) and the usual acute susceptibility and exaltation of the mesmeric perception had supervened. for many months he had been laboring under confirmed phthisis, the more distressing effects of which had been relieved by my manipulations; and on the night of wednesday, the fifteenth instant, i was summoned to his bedside.the invalid was suffering with acute pain in the region of the heart, and breathed with great difficulty, having all the ordinary symptoms of asthma. in spasms such as these he had usually found relief from the application of mustard to the nervous centres, but to-night this had been attempted in vain.as i entered his room he greeted me with a cheerful smile, and although evidently in much bodily pain, appeared to be, mentally, quite at ease."i sent for you to-night," he said, "not so much to administer to my bodily ailment, as to satisfy me concerning certain psychal impressions which, of late, have occasioned me much anxiety and surprise. i need not tell you how sceptical i have hitherto been on the topic of the soul's immortality. i cannot deny that there has always existed, as if in that very soul which i have been denying, a vague half-sentiment of its own existence. but this half-sentiment at no time amounted to conviction. with it my reason had nothing to do. all attempts at logical inquiry resulted, indeed, in leaving me more sceptical than before. i had been advised to study cousin. i studied him in his own works as well as in those of his european and american echoes. the 'charles elwood' of mr. brownson, for example, was placed in my hands. i read it with profound attention. throughout i found it logical, but the portions which were not merely logical were unhappily the initial arguments of the disbelieving hero of the book. in his summing up it seemed evident to me that the reasoner had not even succeeded in convincing himself. his end had plainly forgotten his beginning, like the government of trinculo. in short, i was not long in perceiving that if man is to be intellectually convinced of his own immortality, he will never be so convinced by the mere abstractions which have been so long the fashion of the moralists of england, of france, and of germany. abstractions may amuse and exercise, but take no hold on the mind. here upon earth, at least, philosophy, i am persuaded, will always in vain call upon us to look upon qualities as things. the will may assent - the soul - the intellect, never."i repeat, then, that i only half felt, and never intellectually believed. but latterly there has been a certain deepening of the feeling, until it has come so nearly to resemble the acquiescence of reason, that i find it difficult to distinguish between the two. i am enabled, too, plainly to trace this effect to the mesmeric influence. i cannot better explain my meaning than by the hypothesis that the mesmeric exaltation enables me to perceive a train of ratiocination which, in my abnormal existence, convinces, but which, in full accordance with the mesmeric phenomena, does not extend, except through its effect, into my normal condition. in sleep-waking, the reasoning and its conclusion - the cause and its effect - are present together. in my natural state, the cause vanishing, the effect only, and perhaps only partially, remains."these considerations have led me to think that some good results might ensue from a series of well-directed questions propounded to me while mesmerized. you have often observed the profound self-cognizance evinced by the sleep-waker - the extensive knowledge he displays upon all points relating to the mesmeric condition itself; and from this self-cognizance may be deduced hints for the proper conduct of a catechism."i consented of course to make this experiment. a few passes threw mr. vankirk into the mesmeric sleep. his breathing became immediately more easy, and he seemed to suffer no physical uneasiness. the following conversation then ensued: - v. in the dialogue representing the patient, and p. myself.p. are you asleep?v. yes - no i would rather sleep more soundly.p. [after a few more passes.] do you sleep now?v. yes.p. how do you think your present illness will result?v. [after a long hesitation and speaking as if with effort.] i must die.p. does the idea of death afflict you?v. [very quickly .] no - no!p. are you pleased with the prospect?v. if i were awake i should like to die, but now it is no matter. the mesmeric condition is so near death as to content me.p. i wish you would explain yourself, mr. vankirk.v. i am willing to do so, but it requires more effort than i feel able to make. you do not question me properly.p. what then shall i ask?v. you must begin at the beginning.p. the beginning ! but where is the beginning?v. you know that the beginning is god. [this was said in a low, fluctuating tone, and with every sign of the most profound veneration.]p. what then is god?v. [hesitating for many minutes.] i cannot tell.p. is not god spirit?v. while i was awake i knew what you meant by "spirit," but now it seems only a word - such for instance as truth, beauty - a quality, i mean.p. is not god immaterial?v. there is no immateriality - it is a mere word. that which is not matter, is not at all - unless qualities are things.p. is god, then, materia ?v. no. [this reply startled me very much.]p. what then is he?v. [after a long pause, and mutteringly.] i see - but it is a thing difficult to tell. [another long pause.] he is not spirit, for he exists. nor is he matter, as you understand it . but there are gradations of matter of which man knows nothing; the grosser impelling the finer, the finer pervading the grosser. the atmosphere, for example, impels the electric principle, while the electric principle permeates the atmosphere. these gradations of matter increase in rarity or fineness, until we arrive at a matter unparticled - without particles - indivisible - one and here the law of impulsion and permeation is modified. the ultimate, or unparticled matter, not only permeates all things but impels all things - and thus is all things within itself. this matter is god. what men attempt to embody in the word "thought," is this matter in motion.p. the metaphysicians maintain that all action is reducible to motion and thinking, and that the latter is the origin of the former.v. yes; and i now see the confusion of idea. motion is the action of mind - not of thinking. the unparticled matter, or god, in quiescence, is (as nearly as we can conceive it) what men call mind. and the power of self-movement (equivalent in effect to human volition) is, in the unparticled matter, the result of its unity and omniprevalence; how i know not, and now clearly see that i shall never know. but the unparticled matter, set in motion by a law, or quality, existing within itself, is thinking.p. can you give me no more precise idea of what you term the unparticled matter?v. the matters of which man is cognizant, escape the senses in gradation. we have, for example, a metal, a piece of wood, a drop of water, the atmosphere, a gas, caloric, electricity, the luminiferous ether. now we call all these things matter, and embrace all matter in one general definition; but in spite of this, there can be no two ideas more essentially distinct than that which we attach to a metal, and that which we attach to the luminiferous ether. when we reach the latter, we feel an almost irresistible inclination to class it with spirit, or with nihility. the only consideration which restrains us is our conception of its atomic constitution; and here, even, we have to seek aid from our notion of an atom, as something possessing in infinite minuteness, solidity, palpability, weight. destroy the idea of the atomic constitution and we should no longer be able to regard the ether as an entity, or at least as matter. for want of a better word we might term it spirit. take, now, a step beyond the luminiferous ether - conceive a matter as much more rare than the ether, as this ether is more rare than the metal, and we arrive at once (in spite of all the school dogmas) at a unique mass - an unparticled matter. for although we may admit infinite littleness in the atoms themselves, the infinitude of littleness in the spaces between them is an absurdity. there will be a point - there will be a degree of rarity, at which, if the atoms are sufficiently numerous, the interspaces must vanish, and the mass absolutely coalesce. but the consideration of the atomic constitution being now taken away, the nature of the mass inevitably glides into what we conceive of spirit. it is clear, however, that it is as fully matter as before. the truth is, it is impossible to conceive spirit, since it is impossible to imagine what is not. when we flatter ourselves that we have formed its conception, we have merely deceived our understanding by the consideration of infinitely rarified matter.p. there seems to me an insurmountable objection to the idea of absolute coalescence; - and that is the very slight resistance experienced by the heavenly bodies in their revolutions through space - a resistance now ascertained, it is true, to exist in some degree, but which is, nevertheless, so slight as to have been quite overlooked by the sagacity even of newton. we know that the resistance of bodies is, chiefly, in proportion to their density. absolute coalescence is absolute density. where there are no interspaces, there can be no yielding. an ether, absolutely dense, would put an infinitely more effectual stop to the progress of a star than would an ether of adamant or of iron.v. your objection is answered with an ease which is nearly in the ratio of its apparent unanswerability. - as regards the progress of the star, it can make no difference whether the star passes through the ether or the ether through it . there is no astronomical error more unaccountable than that which reconciles the known retardation of the comets with the idea of their passage through an ether: for, however rare this ether be supposed, it would put a stop to all sidereal revolution in a very far briefer period than has been admitted by those astronomers who have endeavored to slur over a point which they found it impossible to comprehend. the retardation actually experienced is, on the other hand, about that which might be expected from the friction of the ether in the instantaneous passage through the orb. in the one case, the retarding force is momentary and complete within itself - in the other it is endlessly accumulative.p. but in all this - in this identification of mere matter with god - is there nothing of irreverence ? [i was forced to repeat this question before the sleep-waker fully comprehended my meaning.]v. can you say why matter should be less reverenced than mind ? but you forget that the matter of which i speak is, in all respects, the very "mind" or "spirit" of the schools, so far as regards its high capacities, and is, moreover, the "matter" of these schools at the same time. god, with all the powers attributed to spirit, is but the perfection of matter.p. you assert, then, that the unparticled matter, in motion, is thought?v. in general, this motion is the universal thought of the universal mind. this thought creates. all created things are but the thoughts of god.p. you say, "in general."v. yes. the universal mind is god. for new individualities, matter is necessary.p. but you now speak of "mind" and "matter" as do the metaphysicians.v. yes - to avoid confusion. when i say "mind," i mean the unparticled or ultimate matter; by "matter," i intend all else.p. you were saying that "for new individualities matter is necessary."v. yes; for mind, existing unincorporate, is merely god. to create individual, thinking beings, it was necessary to incarnate portions of the divine mind. thus man is individualized. divested of corporate investiture, he were god. now, the particular motion of the incarnated portions of the unparticled matter is the thought of man; as the motion of the whole is that of god.p. you say that divested of the body man will be god?v. [after much hesitation.] i could not have said this; it is an absurdity.p. [referring to my notes.] you did say that "divested of corporate investiture man were god."v. and this is true. man thus divested would be god - would be unindividualized. but he can never be thus divested - at least never will be - else we must imagine an action of god returning upon itself - a purposeless and futile action. man is a creature. creatures are thoughts of god. it is the nature of thought to be irrevocable.p. i do not comprehend. you say that man will never put off the body?v. i say that he will never be bodiless.p. explain.v. there are two bodies - the rudimental and the complete; corresponding with the two conditions of the worm and the butterfly. what we call "death," is but the painful metamorphosis. our present incarnation is progressive, preparatory, temporary. our future is perfected, ultimate, immortal. the ultimate life is the full design.p. but of the worm's metamorphosis we are palpably cognizant.v. we , certainly - but not the worm. the matter of which our rudimental body is composed, is within the ken of the organs of that body; or, more distinctly, our rudimental organs are adapted to the matter of which is formed the rudimental body; but not to that of which the ultimate is composed. the ultimate body thus escapes our rudimental senses, and we perceive only the shell which falls, in decaying, from the inner form; not that inner form itself; but this inner form, as well as the shell, is appreciable by those who have already acquired the ultimate life.p. you have often said that the mesmeric state very nearly resembles death. how is this?v. when i say that it resembles death, i mean that it resembles the ultimate life; for when i am entranced the senses of my rudimental life are in abeyance, and i perceive external things directly, without organs, through a medium which i shall employ in the ultimate, unorganized life.p. unorganized?v. yes; organs are contrivances by which the individual is brought into sensible relation with particular classes and forms of matter, to the exclusion of other classes and forms. the organs of man are adapted to his rudimental condition, and to that only; his ultimate condition, being unorganized, is of unlimited comprehension in all points but one - the nature of the volition of god - that is to say, the motion of the unparticled matter. you will have a distinct idea of the ultimate body by conceiving it to be entire brain. this it is not; but a conception of this nature will bring you near a comprehension of what it is. a luminous body imparts vibration to the luminiferous ether. the vibrations generate similar ones within the retina; these again communicate similar ones to the optic nerve. the nerve conveys similar ones to the brain; the brain, also, similar ones to the unparticled matter which permeates it. the motion of this latter is thought, of which perception is the first undulation. this is the mode by which the mind of the rudimental life communicates with the external world; and this external world is, to the rudimental life, limited, through the idiosyncrasy of its organs. but in the ultimate, unorganized life, the external world reaches the whole body, (which is of a substance having affinity to brain, as i have said,) with no other intervention than that of an infinitely rarer ether than even the luminiferous; and to this ether - in unison with it - the whole body vibrates, setting in motion the unparticled matter which permeates it. it is to the absence of idiosyncratic organs, therefore, that we must attribute the nearly unlimited perception of the ultimate life. to rudimental beings, organs are the cages necessary to confine them until fledged.p. you speak of rudimental "beings." are there other rudimental thinking beings than man?v. the multitudinous conglomeration of rare matter into nebulã¦, planets, suns, and other bodies which are neither nebulã¦, suns, nor planets, is for the sole purpose of supplying pabulum for the idiosyncrasy of the organs of an infinity of rudimental beings. but for the necessity of the rudimental, prior to the ultimate life, there would have been no bodies such as these. each of these is tenanted by a distinct variety of organic, rudimental, thinking creatures. in all, the organs vary with the features of the place tenanted. at death, or metamorphosis, these creatures, enjoying the ultimate life - immortality - and cognizant of all secrets but the one , act all things and pass everywhere by mere volition: - indwelling, not the stars, which to us seem the sole palpabilities, and for the accommodation of which we blindly deem space created - but that space itself - that infinity of which the truly substantive vastness swallows up the star-shadows -- blotting them out as non-entities from the perception of the angels.p. you say that "but for the necessity of the rudimental life" there would have been no stars. but why this necessity?v. in the inorganic life, as well as in the inorganic matter generally, there is nothing to impede the action of one simple unique law - the divine volition. with the view of producing impediment, the organic life and matter, (complex, substantial, and law-encumbered,) were contrived.p. but again - why need this impediment have been produced?v. the result of law inviolate is perfection - right - negative happiness. the result of law violate is imperfection, wrong, positive pain. through the impediments afforded by the number, complexity, and substantiality of the laws of organic life and matter, the violation of law is rendered, to a certain extent, practicable. thus pain, which in the inorganic life is impossible, is possible in the organic.p. but to what good end is pain thus rendered possible?v. all things are either good or bad by comparison. a sufficient analysis will show that pleasure, in all cases, is but the contrast of pain. positive pleasure is a mere idea. to be happy at any one point we must have suffered at the same. never to suffer would have been never to have been blessed. but it has been shown that, in the inorganic life, pain cannot be thus the necessity for the organic. the pain of the primitive life of earth, is the sole basis of the bliss of the ultimate life in heaven.p. still, there is one of your expressions which i find it impossible to comprehend - "the truly substantive vastness of infinity."v. this, probably, is because you have no sufficiently generic conception of the term "substance" itself. we must not regard it as a quality, but as a sentiment: - it is the perception, in thinking beings, of the adaptation of matter to their organization. there are many things on the earth, which would be nihility to the inhabitants of venus - many things visible and tangible in venus, which we could not be brought to appreciate as existing at all. but to the inorganic beings - to the angels - the whole of the unparticled matter is substanceethat is to say, the whole of what we term "space" is to them the truest substantiality; - the stars, meantime, through what we consider their materiality, escaping the angelic sense, just in proportion as the unparticled matter, through what we consider its immateriality, eludes the organic.as the sleep-waker pronounced these latter words, in a feeble tone, i observed on his countenance a singular expression, which somewhat alarmed me, and induced me to awake him at once. no sooner had i done this, than, with a bright smile irradiating all his features, he fell back upon his pillow and expired. i noticed that in less than a minute afterward his corpse had all the stern rigidity of stone. his brow was of the coldness of ice. thus, ordinarily, should it have appeared, only after long pressure from azrael's hand. had the sleep-waker, indeed, during the latter portion of his discourse, been addressing me from out the region of the shadows?impia tortorum longas hic turba furores sanguinis innocui non satiata, aluit. sospite nunc patria, fracto nunc funeris antro, mors ubi dira fuit vita salusque patent.[quatrain composed for the gates of a market to be erected upon the site of the jacobin club house in paris.]i was sick, sick unto death, with that long agony, and when they at length unbound me, and i was permitted to sit, i felt that my senses were leaving me. the sentence, the dread sentence of death, was the last of distinct accentuation which reached my ears. after that, the sound of the inquisitorial voices seemed merged in one dreamy indeterminate hum. it conveyed to my soul the idea of revolution, perhaps from its association in fancy with the burr of a mill-wheel. this only for a brief period, for presently i heard no more. yet, for a while, i saw, but with how terrible an exaggeration!  i saw the lips of the black-robed judges.  they appeared to me white--whiter than the sheet upon which i trace these words--and   thin even to grotesqueness; thin with the intensity of their expression of firmness, of immovable resolution, of stern contempt of human torture. i saw that the decrees of what to me was fate were still issuing from those lips. i saw them writhe with a deadly locution. i saw them fashion the syllables of my name, and i shuddered, because no sound succeeded.  i saw, too, for a few moments of delirious horror,  the soft and nearly imperceptible waving of the sable draperies which enwrapped the walls of the apartment; and then my vision fell upon the seven tall candles upon the table. at first they wore the aspect of charity, and seemed white slender angels who would save me: but then all at once there came a most deadly nausea over my spirit, and i felt every fibre in my frame thrill, as if i had touched the wire of a galvanic battery, while the angel forms became meaningless spectres, with heads of flame,  and i saw that from them there would be no help.  and then there stole into my fancy, like a rich musical note, the thought of what sweet rest there must be in the grave. the thought came gently and stealthily, and it seemed long before it attained full appreciation; but just as my spirit came at length properly to feel and entertain it, the figures of the judges vanished, as if magically, from before me; the tall candles sank into nothingness; their flames went out utterly; the blackness of darkness superened;   all sensations appeared swallowed up in a mad rushing descent as of the soul into hades. then silence, and stillness, and night were the universe.i had swooned; but still will not say that all of consciousness was lost. what of it there remained i will not attempt to define, or even to describe; yet all was not lost. in the deepest slumber--no!  in delirium--no! in a swoon--no! in death--no! even in the grave all was not lost. else there is no immortality for man. arousing from the most profound of slumbers, we break the gossamer web of some dream. yet in a second afterwards (so frail may that web have been) we remember not that we  have dreamed. in the return to life from the swoon there are two stages; first, that of the sense of mental or spiritual; secondly, that of the sense of physical existence. it seems probable that if, upon reaching the second stage, we could recall the impressions of the first, we should find these impressions eloquent in memories of the gulf beyond. and that gulf is, what? how at least shall we distinguish its shadows from those of the tomb? but if the impressions of  what i have termed the first stage are not at will recalled, yet, after long interval, do they not come unbidden, while we marvel whence they come? he who has never swooned is not he who finds strange palaces and wildly familiar faces in coals that glow; is not he who beholds floating in mid-air the sad visions that the many may not view; is not he who ponders over the perfume of some novel flower; is not he whose brain grows bewildered with the meaning of some musical cadence which has never before arrested his attention.amid frequent and thoughtful endeavours to remember, amid earnest struggles to regather some token of the state of seeming nothingness into which my soul had lapsed, there have been moments when i have dreamed of success; there have been brief, very brief periods when i have conjured up remembrances which the lucid reason of a later epoch  assures me could have had reference only to that condition of seeming unconsciousness. these shadows of memory tell indistinctly of tall figures that lifted and bore me in silence down--down--still down--till  a hideous dizziness oppressed me at the mere idea of the interminableness of the descent. they tell also of a vague horror at my heart on account of that heart's unnatural stillness. then comes a sense of sudden motionlessness throughout all things; as if those who bore me (a ghastly train!) had outrun, in their descent, the limits of the limitless, and paused from the wearisomeness of their toil. after this i call to mind flatness and dampness; and then all is madness--the madness of a memory which busies itself among forbidden things.very suddenly there came back to my soul motion and sound--the tumultuous motion of the heart, and in my ears the sound of its beating. then a pause in which all is blank. then again sound, and motion, and touch, a tingling sensation pervading my frame. then the mere consciousness of existence, without thought, a condition which lasted long. then, very suddenly, thought, and shuddering terror, and earnest endeavour to comprehend my true state. then a strong desire to lapse into insensibility. then a rushing revival of soul and a successful effort to move. and now a full memory  of the trial, of the judges, of the sable draperies, of the sentence, of the sickness, of the swoon. then entire forgetfulness of all that followed; of all that a later day and much earnestness of endeavour have enabled me vaguely to recall.so far i had not opened my eyes. i felt that i lay upon my back unbound. i reached out my hand, and it fell heavily upon something damp and hard. there i suffered it to remain for many minutes, while i strove to imagine where and what i could be. i longed, yet dared not, to employ my vision. i dreaded the first glance at objects around me. it was not that i feared to look upon things horrible, but that i grew aghast lest there should be nothing to see. at length, with a wild desperation at heart, i quickly unclosed my eyes. my worst thoughts, then, were confirmed. the blackness of eternal night encompassed me. i struggled for breath. the intensity of the darkness seemed to  oppress and stifle me. the atmosphere was intolerably close. i still lay quietly, and made effort to exercise my reason. i brought to mind the inquisitorial proceedings, and attempted from that point to deduce my real condition. the sentence had passed, and it appeared to me that a very long interval of time had since elapsed. yet not for a moment did i suppose myself actually dead. such a supposition, notwithstanding what we read in fiction, is altogether inconsistent with real existence;--but where and in what state was i? the condemned to death, i knew, perished usually at the auto-da-fes, and one of these had been held on the  very night of the day of my trial. had i been remanded to my dungeon, to await the next sacrifice, which would not take place for many months? this i at once saw could not be. victims had been in immediate demand. moreover my dungeon, as well as all the condemned cells at toledo, had stone floors, and light was not altogether excluded.a fearful idea now suddenly drove the blood in torrents upon my heart, and for a brief period i once more relapsed into insensibility. upon recovering, i at once started to my feet, trembling convulsively in every fibre. i thrust my arms wildly above and around me in all directions. i felt nothing; yet dreaded to move a step, lest i should be impeded by the walls of a tomb. perspiration burst from every pore, and stood in cold big beads upon my forehead.  the agony of suspense grew at length intolerable, and i cautiously moved forward, with my arms extended, and my eyes straining from their sockets, in the hope of catching some faint ray of light. i proceeded for many paces, but still all was blackness and vacancy. i breathed more freely. it seemed evident that mine was not, at least, the most hideous of fates.and now, as i still continued to step cautiously onward, there came thronging upon my recollection a thousand vague rumours of the horrors of toledo.  of the dungeons there had been strange things narrated--fables i had always deemed them--but yet strange, and too ghastly to repeat, save in a whisper. was i left to perish of starvation in this subterranean world of darkness; or what fate perhaps  even more fearful awaited me? that the result would be death, and a death of more than customary bitterness, i knew too well the character of my judges to doubt. the mode and the hour were all that occupied or distracted me.my outstretched hands at length encountered some solid obstruction. it was a wall, seemingly of stone masonry--very smooth, slimy, and cold. i followed it up; stepping with all the careful distrust with which certain antique narratives had inspired me. this process, however, afforded me no means of ascertaining the dimensions of my dungeon; as i might make its circuit, and return to the point whence i set out, without being aware of the fact, so perfectly uniform seemed the wall. i therefore sought the knife which had been in my pocket when led into the inquisitorial chamber, but it was gone; my clothes had been exchanged for a wrapper of coarse serge. i had thought of forcing the blade  in some minute crevice of the masonry, so as to identify my point of departure. the difficulty, nevertheless, was but trivial, although, in the disorder of my fancy, it seemed at first insuperable. i tore a part of the hem from the robe, and placed the fragment at full length, and at right angles to the wall. in groping my way around the prison, i could not fail to encounter this rag upon completing the circuit. so, at least, i thought, but i had not counted upon the extent of the dungeon, or upon my own weakness. the ground was moist and slippery. i staggered onward for some time, when i stumbled and fell. my excessive fatigue induced me to remain prostrate, and sleep soon overtook me  as i lay.upon awaking, and stretching forth an arm, i found beside me a loaf and a pitcher with water. i was too much exhausted to reflect upon this circumstance, but ate and drank with avidity. shortly afterwards i resumed my tour around the prison, and with much toil came at last upon the fragment of the serge. up to the period when i fell i had counted fifty-two paces, and upon resuming my walk i had counted forty-eight more, when i arrived at the rag. there were in all, then, a hundred paces; and, admitting two paces to the yard, i presumed the dungeon to be fifty yards in circuit. i had met, however, with many angles in the wall, and thus i could form no guess at the shape of the vault, for vault i could not help supposing it to be.i had little object--certainly no hope--in these researches, but a vague curiosity prompted me to continue them. quitting the wall, i resolved to cross the area of the enclosure. at first i proceeded with extreme caution, for the floor although seemingly of solid material was treacherous with slime.  at length, however, i took courage and did not hesitate to step firmly--endeavouring to cross in as direct a line as possible. i had advanced some ten or twelve paces in this manner, when the remnant of the torn hem of my robe became entangled between my legs. i stepped on it, and fell violently on my face.in the confusion attending my fall, i did not immediately apprehend a somewhat startling circumstance, which yet, in a few seconds afterward, and while i still lay prostrate, arrested my attention.  it was this: my chin rested upon the floor of the prison, but my lips, and the upper portion of my head, although seemingly at a less elevation than the chin, touched nothing. at the same time, my forehead seemed bathed in a clammy vapour, and the peculiar smell of decayed fungus arose to my nostrils. i put forward my arm, and shuddered to find that i had fallen at the very brink of a circular pit, whose extent of course i had no means of ascertaining at the moment. groping about the masonry just below the margin, i succeeded in dislodging a small fragment, and let it fall into the abyss. for many seconds i hearkened to its reverberations as it dashed against the sides of the chasm in its descent; at length there was a sullen plunge into water, succeeded by loud echoes. at the same moment there came a sound resembling the quick  opening, and as rapid closing of a door overhead, while a faint gleam of light flashed suddenly through the gloom, and as suddenly faded away.i saw clearly the doom which had been prepared for me, and congratulated myself upon the timely accident by which i had escaped. another step before my fall, and the world had seen me no more and the death just avoided was of that very character which i had regarded as fabulous and frivolous in the tales respecting the inquisition. to the victims of its tyranny, there was the choice of death with its direst physical agonies, or death with its most hideous moral horrors. i had been reserved for the latter. by long suffering my nerves had been unstrung, until i trembled at the sound of my own voice, and had become in every respect a fitting subject for the species of torture which awaited me.shaking in every limb, i groped my way back to the wall--resolving there to perish rather than risk the terrors of the wells, of which my imagination now pictured many in various positions about the dungeon. in other conditions of mind i might have had courage to end my misery at once by a plunge into one of these abysses; but now i was the veriest of cowards. neither could i forget what i had read of these pits--that the sudden extinction of life formed no part of their most horrible plan.agitation of spirit kept me awake for many long hours; but at length i again slumbered. upon arousing, i found by my side, as before, a loaf and a pitcher of water. a burning thirst consumed me, and i emptied the vessel at a draught. it must have been drugged, for scarcely had i drunk before i became irresistibly drowsy. a deep sleep fell upon me--a sleep like that of death. how long it lasted of course i know not; but when once again i unclosed my eyes the objects around me were visible.  by a wild sulphurous lustre, the origin of which i could not at first determine, i was enabled to see the extent and aspect of the prison.in its size i had been greatly mistaken. the whole circuit of its walls did not exceed twenty-five yards. for some minutes this fact occasioned me a world of vain trouble; vain indeed--for what could be of less importance, under the terrible circumstances which environed me than the mere dimensions of my dungeon? but my soul took a wild interest in trifles, and i busied myself in endeavours to account for the error i had committed in my measurement. the truth at length flashed upon me. in my first attempt at exploration i had counted fifty-two paces up to the period when i fell; i must then have been within a pace or two of the fragment of serge; in fact i had nearly performed the circuit of the vault. i then slept, and upon awaking, i must have returned upon my steps, thus supposing the circuit nearly double what it actually was. my confusion of mind prevented me from observing that i began my tour with the wall to the left, and ended it with the wall to the right.i had been deceived too in respect to the shape of the enclosure. in feeling my way i had found many angles, and thus deduced an idea of great irregularity, so potent is the effect of total darkness upon one arousing from lethargy or sleep! the angles were simply those of a few slight depressions or niches at odd intervals. the general shape of the prison was square. what i had taken for masonry seemed now to be iron, or some other metal in huge plates, whose sutures or joints occasioned the depression. the entire surface of this metallic enclosure was rudely daubed in all the hideous and repulsive devices to which the charnel superstition of the monks has given rise. the figures of fiends in aspects of menace, with skeleton forms and other more really fearful images, overspread and disfigured the walls. i observed that the outlines of these monstrosities were sufficiently distinct, but that the colours seemed faded and blurred, as if from the effects of a damp atmosphere. i now noticed the floor, too, which was of stone. in the centre yawned the circular pit from whose jaws i had escaped; but it was the only one in the dungeon.all this i saw indistinctly and by much effort, for my personal condition had been greatly changed during slumber. i now lay upon my back, and at full length, on a species of low framework of wood. to this i was securely bound by a long strap resembling a surcingle. it passed in many convolutions about my limbs and body, leaving at liberty only my head, and my left arm to such extent that i could by dint of much exertion supply myself with food from an earthen dish which lay by my side on the floor. i saw to my horror that the pitcher had been removed. i say to my horror, for i was consumed with intolerable thirst. this thirst it appeared to be the design of my persecutors to stimulate, for the food in the dish was meat pungently seasoned.looking upward, i surveyed the ceiling of my prison. it was some thirty or forty feet overhead, and constructed much as the side walls. in one of its panels a very singular figure riveted my whole attention. it was the painted figure of time as he is commonly represented, save that in lieu of a scythe he held what at a casual glance i supposed to be the pictured image of a huge pendulum, such as we see on antique clocks. there was something, however, in the appearance of this machine which caused me to regard it more attentively. while i gazed directly upward at it (for its position was immediately over my own), i fancied that i saw it in motion.  in an instant afterward the fancy was confirmed.  its sweep was brief, and of course slow. i watched it for some minutes, somewhat in fear but more in wonder. wearied at length with observing its dull movement, i turned my eyes upon the other objects in the cell.a slight noise attracted my notice, and looking to the floor, i saw several enormous rats traversing it. they had issued from the well which lay just within view to my right. even then while i gazed, they came up in troops hurriedly, with ravenous eyes, allured by the scent of the meat. from this it required much effort and attention to scare them away.it might have been half-an-hour, perhaps even an hour (for i could take but imperfect note of time) before i again cast my eyes upward. what i then saw confounded and amazed me. the sweep of the pendulum had increased in extent by nearly a yard. as a natural consequence, its velocity was also much greater. but what mainly disturbed me was the idea that it had perceptibly descended. i now observed, with what horror it is needless to say, that its nether extremity was formed of a crescent of glittering steel, about a foot in length from horn to horn; the horns upward, and the under edge evidently as keen as that of a razor. like a razor also it seemed massy and heavy, tapering from the edge into a solid and broad structure above. it was appended to a weighty rod of brass, and the whole hissed as it swung through the air.i could no longer doubt the doom prepared for me by monkish ingenuity in torture. my cognisance of the pit had become known to the inquisitorial agents--the pit, whose horrors had been destined for so bold a recusant as myself, the pit, typical of hell, and regarded by rumour as the ultima thule of all their punishments. the plunge into this pit i had avoided by the merest of accidents, and i knew that surprise or entrapment into torment formed an important portion of all the grotesquerie of these dungeon deaths. having failed to fall, it was no part of the demon plan to hurl me into the abyss, and thus (there being no alternative) a different and a milder destruction awaited me. milder! i half smiled in my agony as i thought of such application of such a term.what boots it to tell of the long, long hours of horror more than mortal, during which i counted the rushing oscillations of the steel! inch by inch--line by line--with a descent only appreciable at intervals that seemed ages--down and still down it came! days passed--it might have been that many days passed--ere it swept so closely over me as to fan me with its acrid breath. the odour of the sharp steel forced itself into my nostrils. i prayed--i wearied heaven with my prayer for its more speedy descent. i grew frantically mad, and struggled to force myself upward against the sweep of the fearful scimitar. and then i fell suddenly calm and lay smiling at the glittering death as a child at some rare bauble.there was another interval of utter insensibility; it was brief, for upon again lapsing into life there had been no perceptible descent in the pendulum.  but it might have been long--for i knew there were demons who took note of my swoon, and who could have arrested the vibration at pleasure. upon my recovery, too, i felt very--oh! inexpressibly--sick and weak, as if through long inanition. even amid the agonies of that period the human nature craved food. with painful effort i outstretched my left arm as far as my bonds permitted, and took possession of the small remnant which had been spared me by the rats. as i put a portion of it within my lips there rushed to my mind a half-formed thought of joy--of hope. yet what business had i with hope? it was, as i say, a half-formed thought--man  has many such, which are never completed.    i felt that it was of joy--of hope; but i felt also that it had perished in its formation. in vain i struggled to perfect--to regain it. long suffering had nearly annihilated all my ordinary powers of mind. i was an imbecile--an idiot.the vibration of the pendulum was at right angles to my length. i saw that the crescent was designed to cross the region of the heart. it would fray the serge of my robe; it would return and repeat its operations--again--and again. notwithstanding its terrifically wide sweep (some thirty feet or more) and the hissing vigour of its descent, sufficient to sunder these very walls of iron, still the fraying of my robe would be all that, for several minutes, it would accomplish; and at this thought i paused. i dared not go farther than this reflection. i dwelt upon it with a pertinacity of attention--as if, in so dwelling, i could arrest here the descent of the steel.  i forced myself to ponder upon the sound of the crescent as it should pass across the garment--upon the peculiar thrilling sensation which the friction of cloth produces on the nerves. i pondered upon all this frivolity until my teeth were on edge.down--steadily down it crept. i took a frenzied pleasure in contrasting its downward with its lateral velocity. to the  right--to the left--far and wide--with the shriek of a damned spirit! to my heart with the stealthy pace of the tiger! i alternately laughed and howled, as the one or the other idea grew predominant.down--certainly, relentlessly down! it vibrated within three inches of my bosom! i struggled violently--furiously--to free my left arm. this was free only from the elbow to the hand. i could reach the latter, from the platter beside me to my mouth with great effort, but no farther. could i have broken the fastenings above the elbow, i would have seized and attempted to arrest the pendulum. i  might as well have attempted to arrest an avalanche!down--still unceasingly--still inevitably down! i gasped and struggled at each vibration. i shrunk convulsively at its very sweep. my eyes followed its outward or upward whirls with the eagerness of the most unmeaning despair; they closed themselves spasmodically at the descent, although death would have been a relief, o, how unspeakable! still i quivered in every nerve to think how slight a sinking of the machinery would precipitate that keen glistening axe upon my bosom. it was hope that prompted the nerve to quiver--the frame to shrink. it was hope--the hope that triumphs on the rack--that whispers to the death-condemned even in the dungeons of the inquisition.i saw that some ten or twelve vibrations would bring the steel in actual contact with my robe, and with this observation there suddenly came over my spirit all the keen, collected calmness of despair.  for the first time during many hours, or perhaps days, i thought. it now occurred to me that the bandage or surcingle which enveloped me was unique. i was tied by no separate cord. the first stroke of the razor-like crescent athwart any portion of the band would so detach it that it might be unwound from my person by means of my left hand.  but how fearful, in that case, the proximity of the steel! the result of the slightest struggle, how deadly! was it likely, moreover, that the minions of the torturer had not foreseen and provided for this possibility! was it probable that the bandage crossed my bosom in the track of the pendulum?  dreading to find my faint, and, as it seemed, my last hope frustrated, i so far elevated my head as to obtain a distinct view of my breast. the surcingle enveloped my limbs and body close in all directions save save in the path of the destroying crescent.scarcely had i dropped my head back into its original position when there flashed upon my mind what i cannot better describe than as the unformed half of that idea of deliverance to which i have previously  alluded, and of which a moiety only floated indeterminately through my brain when i raised food to my burning lips. the whole thought was now present--feeble, scarcely sane, scarcely definite, but still entire. i proceeded at once, with the nervous energy of despair, to attempt its execution.for many hours the immediate vicinity of the low framework upon which i lay had been literally swarming with rats. they were wild, bold, ravenous, their red eyes glaring upon me as if they waited but for motionlessness on my part to make me their prey. "to what food," i thought, "have they been accustomed in the well?"they had devoured, in spite of all my efforts to prevent them, all but a small remnant of the contents of the dish. i had fallen into an habitual see-saw or wave of the hand about the platter; and at length the unconscious uniformity of the movement deprived it of effect. in their voracity the vermin frequently fastened their sharp fangs in my fingers. with the particles of the oily and spicy viand which now remained, i thoroughly rubbed the bandage wherever i could reach it; then, raising my hand from the floor, i lay breathlessly still.at first the ravenous animals were startled and terrified at the change--at the cessation of movement. they shrank alarmedly back; many sought the well. but this was only for a moment. i had not counted in vain upon their voracity. observing that i remained without motion, one or two of the boldest leaped upon the frame-work and smelt at the surcingle. this seemed the signal for a general rush. forth from the well they hurried in fresh troops. they clung to the wood, they overran it, and leaped in hundreds upon my person. the measured movement of the pendulum disturbed them not at all. avoiding its strokes, they busied themselves with the annointed bandage. they pressed, they swarmed upon me in ever accumulating heaps. they writhed upon my throat; their cold lips sought my own; i was half stifled by their thronging pressure; disgust, for which the world  has no name, swelled my bosom, and chilled with heavy clamminess my heart. yet one minute and i felt that the struggle would be over. plainly i perceived the loosening of the bandage. i knew that in more than one place it must be already severed. with a more than human resolution i lay still.nor had i erred in my calculations, nor had i endured in vain. i at length felt that i was free. the surcingle hung in ribands from my body. but the stroke of the pendulum already pressed upon my bosom. it had divided the serge of the robe. it had cut through the linen beneath. twice again it swung, and a sharp sense of pain shot through every nerve. but the moment of escape had arrived.  at a wave of my hand my deliverers hurried tumultously away. with a steady movement, cautious, sidelong, shrinking, and slow, i slid from the embrace of the bandage and beyond the reach of the scimitar. for the moment, at least i was free.free! and in the grasp of the inquisition! i had scarcely stepped from my wooden bed of horror upon the stone floor of the prison, when the motion of the hellish machine ceased and i beheld it drawn up by some invisible force through the ceiling.  this was a lesson which i took desperately to heart.  my every motion was undoubtedly watched. free! i had but escaped death in one form of agony to be delivered unto worse than death in some other.  with that thought i rolled my eyes nervously around on the barriers of iron that hemmed me in.  something unusual--some change which at first i could not appreciate distinctly--it was obvious had taken place in the apartment. for many minutes of a dreamy and trembling abstraction i busied myself in vain, unconnected conjecture. during this  period i became aware, for the first time, of the origin of the sulphurous light which illumined the cell. it proceeded from a fissure about half-an-inch in width extending entirely around the prison at the base of the walls which thus appeared, and were completely separated from the floor. i endeavoured, but of course in vain, to look through the aperture.   as i arose from the attempt, the mystery of the alteration in the chamber broke at once upon my understanding. i have observed that although the outlines of the figures upon the walls were sufficiently distinct, yet the colours seemed blurred and indefinite.  these colours had now assumed, and were momentarily assuming, a startling and most intense brilliancy, that give to the spectral and fiendish portraitures an aspect that might have thrilled even firmer nerves than my own. demon eyes, of a wild and ghastly vivacity, glared upon me in a thousand directions where none had been visible before, and gleamed with the lurid lustre of a fire that i could not force my imagination to regard as unreal.unreal!--even while i breathed there came to my nostrils the breath of the vapour of heated iron! a suffocating odour pervaded the prison! a deeper glow settled each moment in the eyes that glared at my agonies! a richer tint of crimson diffused itself over the pictured horrors of blood. i panted ' i gasped for breath! there could be no doubt of the design of my tormentors--oh most unrelenting! oh, most demoniac of men! i shrank from the glowing metal to the centre of the cell. amid the thought of the fiery destruction that impended, the idea of the coolness of the well came over my soul like balm. i rushed to its deadly brink. i threw my straining vision below. the glare from the enkindled roof illumined its inmost recesses. yet, for a wild moment, did my spirit refuse to comprehend the meaning of what i saw. at length it forced --it wrestled its way into my soul--it burned itself in upon my shuddering reason. o for a voice to speak!--oh, horror!--oh, any horror but this! with a shriek i rushed from the margin and buried my face in my hands--weeping bitterly.the heat rapidly increased, and once again i looked up, shuddering as if with a fit of the ague.  there had been a second change in the cell--and now the change was obviously in the form. as before, it was in vain that i at first endeavoured to appreciate or understand what was taking place.  but not long was i left in doubt. the inquisitorial vengeance had been hurried by my two-fold escape, and there was to be no more dallying with the king of terrors. the room had been square.  i saw that two of its iron angles were now acute--two consequently, obtuse. the fearful difference quickly increased with a low rumbling or moaning sound. in an instant the apartment had shifted its form into that of a lozenge. but the alteration stopped not here--i neither hoped nor desired it to stop. i could have clasped the red walls to my bosom as a garment of eternal peace. "death," i said "any death but that of the pit!" fool! might i not have known that into the pit it was the object  of the burning iron to urge me? could i resist its glow? or if even that, could i withstand its pressure? and now, flatter and flatter grew the lozenge, with a rapidity that left me no time for contemplation. its centre, and of course, its greatest width, came just over the yawning gulf. i shrank back--but the closing walls pressed me resistlessly onward. at length for my seared and writhing body there was no longer an inch of foothold on the firm floor of the prison. i struggled no more, but the agony of my soul found vent in one loud, long, and final scream of despair. i felt that i tottered upon the brink--i averted my eyes--there was a discordant hum of human voices! there was a loud blast as of many trumpets! there was a harsh grating as of a thousand thunders! the fiery walls rushed back! an outstretched arm caught my own as i fell fainting into the abyss.  it was that of general lasalle. the french army had entered toledo. the inquisition was in    the hands of its enemies.there are certain themes of which the interest is all-absorbing, but which are too entirely horrible for the purposes of legitimate fiction. these the mere romanticist must eschew, if he do not wish to offend or to disgust. they are with propriety handled only when the severity and majesty of truth sanctify and sustain them. we thrill, for example, with the most intense of "pleasurable pain" over the accounts of the passage of the beresina, of the earthquake at lisbon, of the plague at london, of the massacre of st. bartholomew, or of the stifling of the hundred and twenty-three prisoners in the black hole at calcutta. but in these accounts it is the fact - -- it is the reality - -- it is the history which excites. as inventions, we should regard them with simple abhorrence.i have mentioned some few of the more prominent and august calamities on record; but in these it is the extent, not less than the character of the calamity, which so vividly impresses the fancy. i need not remind the reader that, from the long and weird catalogue of human miseries, i might have selected many individual instances more replete with essential suffering than any of these vast generalities of disaster. the true wretchedness, indeed -- the ultimate woe - -- is particular, not diffuse. that the ghastly extremes of agony are endured by man the unit, and never by man the mass - -- for this let us thank a merciful god!to be buried while alive is, beyond question, the most terrific of these extremes which has ever fallen to the lot of mere mortality. that it has frequently, very frequently, so fallen will scarcely be denied by those who think. the boundaries which divide life from death are at best shadowy and vague. who shall say where the one ends, and where the other begins? we know that there are diseases in which occur total cessations of all the apparent functions of vitality, and yet in which these cessations are merely suspensions, properly so called. they are only temporary pauses in the incomprehensible mechanism. a certain period elapses, and some unseen mysterious principle again sets in motion the magic pinions and the wizard wheels. the silver cord was not for ever loosed, nor the golden bowl irreparably broken. but where, meantime, was the soul?apart, however, from the inevitable conclusion, a priori that such causes must produce such effects - -- that the well-known occurrence of such cases of suspended animation must naturally give rise, now and then, to premature interments -- apart from this consideration, we have the direct testimony of medical and ordinary experience to prove that a vast number of such interments have actually taken place. i might refer at once, if necessary to a hundred well authenticated instances. one of very remarkable character, and of which the circumstances may be fresh in the memory of some of my readers, occurred, not very long ago, in the neighboring city of baltimore, where it occasioned a painful, intense, and widely-extended excitement. the wife of one of the most respectable citizens-a lawyer of eminence and a member of congress -- was seized with a sudden and unaccountable illness, which completely baffled the skill of her physicians. after much suffering she died, or was supposed to die. no one suspected, indeed, or had reason to suspect, that she was not actually dead. she presented all the ordinary appearances of death. the face assumed the usual pinched and sunken outline. the lips were of the usual marble pallor. the eyes were lustreless. there was no warmth. pulsation had ceased. for three days the body was preserved unburied, during which it had acquired a stony rigidity. the funeral, in short, was hastened, on account of the rapid advance of what was supposed to be decomposition.the lady was deposited in her family vault, which, for three subsequent years, was undisturbed. at the expiration of this term it was opened for the reception of a sarcophagus; - -- but, alas! how fearful a shock awaited the husband, who, personally, threw open the door! as its portals swung outwardly back, some white-apparelled object fell rattling within his arms. it was the skeleton of his wife in her yet unmoulded shroud.a careful investigation rendered it evident that she had revived within two days after her entombment; that her struggles within the coffin had caused it to fall from a ledge, or shelf to the floor, where it was so broken as to permit her escape. a lamp which had been accidentally left, full of oil, within the tomb, was found empty; it might have been exhausted, however, by evaporation. on the uttermost of the steps which led down into the dread chamber was a large fragment of the coffin, with which, it seemed, that she had endeavored to arrest attention by striking the iron door. while thus occupied, she probably swooned, or possibly died, through sheer terror; and, in failing, her shroud became entangled in some iron -- work which projected interiorly. thus she remained, and thus she rotted, erect.in the year 1810, a case of living inhumation happened in france, attended with circumstances which go far to warrant the assertion that truth is, indeed, stranger than fiction. the heroine of the story was a mademoiselle victorine lafourcade, a young girl of illustrious family, of wealth, and of great personal beauty. among her numerous suitors was julien bossuet, a poor litterateur, or journalist of paris. his talents and general amiability had recommended him to the notice of the heiress, by whom he seems to have been truly beloved; but her pride of birth decided her, finally, to reject him, and to wed a monsieur renelle, a banker and a diplomatist of some eminence. after marriage, however, this gentleman neglected, and, perhaps, even more positively ill-treated her. having passed with him some wretched years, she died, - -- at least her condition so closely resembled death as to deceive every one who saw her. she was buried - -- not in a vault, but in an ordinary grave in the village of her nativity. filled with despair, and still inflamed by the memory of a profound attachment, the lover journeys from the capital to the remote province in which the village lies, with the romantic purpose of disinterring the corpse, and possessing himself of its luxuriant tresses. he reaches the grave. at midnight he unearths the coffin, opens it, and is in the act of detaching the hair, when he is arrested by the unclosing of the beloved eyes. in fact, the lady had been buried alive. vitality had not altogether departed, and she was aroused by the caresses of her lover from the lethargy which had been mistaken for death. he bore her frantically to his lodgings in the village. he employed certain powerful restoratives suggested by no little medical learning. in fine, she revived. she recognized her preserver. she remained with him until, by slow degrees, she fully recovered her original health. her woman's heart was not adamant, and this last lesson of love sufficed to soften it. she bestowed it upon bossuet. she returned no more to her husband, but, concealing from him her resurrection, fled with her lover to america. twenty years afterward, the two returned to france, in the persuasion that time had so greatly altered the lady's appearance that her friends would be unable to recognize her. they were mistaken, however, for, at the first meeting, monsieur renelle did actually recognize and make claim to his wife. this claim she resisted, and a judicial tribunal sustained her in her resistance, deciding that the peculiar circumstances, with the long lapse of years, had extinguished, not only equitably, but legally, the authority of the husband.the "chirurgical journal" of leipsic -- a periodical of high authority and merit, which some american bookseller would do well to translate and republish, records in a late number a very distressing event of the character in question.an officer of artillery, a man of gigantic stature and of robust health, being thrown from an unmanageable horse, received a very severe contusion upon the head, which rendered him insensible at once; the skull was slightly fractured, but no immediate danger was apprehended. trepanning was accomplished successfully. he was bled, and many other of the ordinary means of relief were adopted. gradually, however, he fell into a more and more hopeless state of stupor, and, finally, it was thought that he died.the weather was warm, and he was buried with indecent haste in one of the public cemeteries. his funeral took place on thursday. on the sunday following, the grounds of the cemetery were, as usual, much thronged with visiters, and about noon an intense excitement was created by the declaration of a peasant that, while sitting upon the grave of the officer, he had distinctly felt a commotion of the earth, as if occasioned by some one struggling beneath. at first little attention was paid to the man's asseveration; but his evident terror, and the dogged obstinacy with which he persisted in his story, had at length their natural effect upon the crowd. spades were hurriedly procured, and the grave, which was shamefully shallow, was in a few minutes so far thrown open that the head of its occupant appeared. he was then seemingly dead; but he sat nearly erect within his coffin, the lid of which, in his furious struggles, he had partially uplifted.he was forthwith conveyed to the nearest hospital, and there pronounced to be still living, although in an asphytic condition. after some hours he revived, recognized individuals of his acquaintance, and, in broken sentences spoke of his agonies in the grave.from what he related, it was clear that he must have been conscious of life for more than an hour, while inhumed, before lapsing into insensibility. the grave was carelessly and loosely filled with an exceedingly porous soil; and thus some air was necessarily admitted. he heard the footsteps of the crowd overhead, and endeavored to make himself heard in turn. it was the tumult within the grounds of the cemetery, he said, which appeared to awaken him from a deep sleep, but no sooner was he awake than he became fully aware of the awful horrors of his position.this patient, it is recorded, was doing well and seemed to be in a fair way of ultimate recovery, but fell a victim to the quackeries of medical experiment. the galvanic battery was applied, and he suddenly expired in one of those ecstatic paroxysms which, occasionally, it superinduces.the mention of the galvanic battery, nevertheless, recalls to my memory a well known and very extraordinary case in point, where its action proved the means of restoring to animation a young attorney of london, who had been interred for two days. this occurred in 1831, and created, at the time, a very profound sensation wherever it was made the subject of converse.the patient, mr. edward stapleton, had died, apparently of typhus fever, accompanied with some anomalous symptoms which had excited the curiosity of his medical attendants. upon his seeming decease, his friends were requested to sanction a post-mortem examination, but declined to permit it. as often happens, when such refusals are made, the practitioners resolved to disinter the body and dissect it at leisure, in private. arrangements were easily effected with some of the numerous corps of body-snatchers, with which london abounds; and, upon the third night after the funeral, the supposed corpse was unearthed from a grave eight feet deep, and deposited in the opening chamber of one of the private hospitals.an incision of some extent had been actually made in the abdomen, when the fresh and undecayed appearance of the subject suggested an application of the battery. one experiment succeeded another, and the customary effects supervened, with nothing to characterize them in any respect, except, upon one or two occasions, a more than ordinary degree of life-likeness in the convulsive action.it grew late. the day was about to dawn; and it was thought expedient, at length, to proceed at once to the dissection. a student, however, was especially desirous of testing a theory of his own, and insisted upon applying the battery to one of the pectoral muscles. a rough gash was made, and a wire hastily brought in contact, when the patient, with a hurried but quite unconvulsive movement, arose from the table, stepped into the middle of the floor, gazed about him uneasily for a few seconds, and then -- spoke. what he said was unintelligible, but words were uttered; the syllabification was distinct. having spoken, he fell heavily to the floor.for some moments all were paralyzed with awe -- but the urgency of the case soon restored them their presence of mind. it was seen that mr. stapleton was alive, although in a swoon. upon exhibition of ether he revived and was rapidly restored to health, and to the society of his friends -- from whom, however, all knowledge of his resuscitation was withheld, until a relapse was no longer to be apprehended. their wonder -- their rapturous astonishment -- may be conceived.the most thrilling peculiarity of this incident, nevertheless, is involved in what mr. s. himself asserts. he declares that at no period was he altogether insensible -- that, dully and confusedly, he was aware of everything which happened to him, from the moment in which he was pronounced dead by his physicians, to that in which he fell swooning to the floor of the hospital. "i am alive," were the uncomprehended words which, upon recognizing the locality of the dissecting-room, he had endeavored, in his extremity, to utter.it were an easy matter to multiply such histories as these -- but i forbear -- for, indeed, we have no need of such to establish the fact that premature interments occur. when we reflect how very rarely, from the nature of the case, we have it in our power to detect them, we must admit that they may frequently occur without our cognizance. scarcely, in truth, is a graveyard ever encroached upon, for any purpose, to any great extent, that skeletons are not found in postures which suggest the most fearful of suspicions.fearful indeed the suspicion -- but more fearful the doom! it may be asserted, without hesitation, that no event is so terribly well adapted to inspire the supremeness of bodily and of mental distress, as is burial before death. the unendurable oppression of the lungs -- the stifling fumes from the damp earth -- the clinging to the death garments -- the rigid embrace of the narrow house -- the blackness of the absolute night -- the silence like a sea that overwhelms -- the unseen but palpable presence of the conqueror worm -- these things, with the thoughts of the air and grass above, with memory of dear friends who would fly to save us if but informed of our fate, and with consciousness that of this fate they can never be informed -- that our hopeless portion is that of the really dead -- these considerations, i say, carry into the heart, which still palpitates, a degree of appalling and intolerable horror from which the most daring imagination must recoil. we know of nothing so agonizing upon earth -- we can dream of nothing half so hideous in the realms of the nethermost hell. and thus all narratives upon this topic have an interest profound; an interest, nevertheless, which, through the sacred awe of the topic itself, very properly and very peculiarly depends upon our conviction of the truth of the matter narrated. what i have now to tell is of my own actual knowledge -- of my own positive and personal experience.for several years i had been subject to attacks of the singular disorder which physicians have agreed to term catalepsy, in default of a more definitive title. although both the immediate and the predisposing causes, and even the actual diagnosis, of this disease are still mysterious, its obvious and apparent character is sufficiently well understood. its variations seem to be chiefly of degree. sometimes the patient lies, for a day only, or even for a shorter period, in a species of exaggerated lethargy. he is senseless and externally motionless; but the pulsation of the heart is still faintly perceptible; some traces of warmth remain; a slight color lingers within the centre of the cheek; and, upon application of a mirror to the lips, we can detect a torpid, unequal, and vacillating action of the lungs. then again the duration of the trance is for weeks -- even for months; while the closest scrutiny, and the most rigorous medical tests, fail to establish any material distinction between the state of the sufferer and what we conceive of absolute death. very usually he is saved from premature interment solely by the knowledge of his friends that he has been previously subject to catalepsy, by the consequent suspicion excited, and, above all, by the non-appearance of decay. the advances of the malady are, luckily, gradual. the first manifestations, although marked, are unequivocal. the fits grow successively more and more distinctive, and endure each for a longer term than the preceding. in this lies the principal security from inhumation. the unfortunate whose first attack should be of the extreme character which is occasionally seen, would almost inevitably be consigned alive to the tomb.my own case differed in no important particular from those mentioned in medical books. sometimes, without any apparent cause, i sank, little by little, into a condition of hemi-syncope, or half swoon; and, in this condition, without pain, without ability to stir, or, strictly speaking, to think, but with a dull lethargic consciousness of life and of the presence of those who surrounded my bed, i remained, until the crisis of the disease restored me, suddenly, to perfect sensation. at other times i was quickly and impetuously smitten. i grew sick, and numb, and chilly, and dizzy, and so fell prostrate at once. then, for weeks, all was void, and black, and silent, and nothing became the universe. total annihilation could be no more. from these latter attacks i awoke, however, with a gradation slow in proportion to the suddenness of the seizure. just as the day dawns to the friendless and houseless beggar who roams the streets throughout the long desolate winter night -- just so tardily -- just so wearily -- just so cheerily came back the light of the soul to me.apart from the tendency to trance, however, my general health appeared to be good; nor could i perceive that it was at all affected by the one prevalent malady -- unless, indeed, an idiosyncrasy in my ordinary sleep may be looked upon as superinduced. upon awaking from slumber, i could never gain, at once, thorough possession of my senses, and always remained, for many minutes, in much bewilderment and perplexity; -- the mental faculties in general, but the memory in especial, being in a condition of absolute abeyance.in all that i endured there was no physical suffering but of moral distress an infinitude. my fancy grew charnel, i talked "of worms, of tombs, and epitaphs." i was lost in reveries of death, and the idea of premature burial held continual possession of my brain. the ghastly danger to which i was subjected haunted me day and night. in the former, the torture of meditation was excessive -- in the latter, supreme. when the grim darkness overspread the earth, then, with every horror of thought, i shook -- shook as the quivering plumes upon the hearse. when nature could endure wakefulness no longer, it was with a struggle that i consented to sleep -- for i shuddered to reflect that, upon awaking, i might find myself the tenant of a grave. and when, finally, i sank into slumber, it was only to rush at once into a world of phantasms, above which, with vast, sable, overshadowing wing, hovered, predominant, the one sepulchral idea.from the innumerable images of gloom which thus oppressed me in dreams, i select for record but a solitary vision. methought i was immersed in a cataleptic trance of more than usual duration and profundity. suddenly there came an icy hand upon my forehead, and an impatient, gibbering voice whispered the word "arise!" within my ear.i sat erect. the darkness was total. i could not see the figure of him who had aroused me. i could call to mind neither the period at which i had fallen into the trance, nor the locality in which i then lay. while i remained motionless, and busied in endeavors to collect my thought, the cold hand grasped me fiercely by the wrist, shaking it petulantly, while the gibbering voice said again:"arise! did i not bid thee arise?""and who," i demanded, "art thou?""i have no name in the regions which i inhabit," replied the voice, mournfully; "i was mortal, but am fiend. i was merciless, but am pitiful. thou dost feel that i shudder. -- my teeth chatter as i speak, yet it is not with the chilliness of the night -- of the night without end. but this hideousness is insufferable. how canst thou tranquilly sleep? i cannot rest for the cry of these great agonies. these sights are more than i can bear. get thee up! come with me into the outer night, and let me unfold to thee the graves. is not this a spectacle of woe? -- behold!"i looked; and the unseen figure, which still grasped me by the wrist, had caused to be thrown open the graves of all mankind, and from each issued the faint phosphoric radiance of decay, so that i could see into the innermost recesses, and there view the shrouded bodies in their sad and solemn slumbers with the worm. but alas! the real sleepers were fewer, by many millions, than those who slumbered not at all; and there was a feeble struggling; and there was a general sad unrest; and from out the depths of the countless pits there came a melancholy rustling from the garments of the buried. and of those who seemed tranquilly to repose, i saw that a vast number had changed, in a greater or less degree, the rigid and uneasy position in which they had originally been entombed. and the voice again said to me as i gazed:"is it not -- oh! is it not a pitiful sight?" -- but, before i could find words to reply, the figure had ceased to grasp my wrist, the phosphoric lights expired, and the graves were closed with a sudden violence, while from out them arose a tumult of despairing cries, saying again: "is it not -- o, god, is it not a very pitiful sight?"phantasies such as these, presenting themselves at night, extended their terrific influence far into my waking hours. my nerves became thoroughly unstrung, and i fell a prey to perpetual horror. i hesitated to ride, or to walk, or to indulge in any exercise that would carry me from home. in fact, i no longer dared trust myself out of the immediate presence of those who were aware of my proneness to catalepsy, lest, falling into one of my usual fits, i should be buried before my real condition could be ascertained. i doubted the care, the fidelity of my dearest friends. i dreaded that, in some trance of more than customary duration, they might be prevailed upon to regard me as irrecoverable. i even went so far as to fear that, as i occasioned much trouble, they might be glad to consider any very protracted attack as sufficient excuse for getting rid of me altogether. it was in vain they endeavored to reassure me by the most solemn promises. i exacted the most sacred oaths, that under no circumstances they would bury me until decomposition had so materially advanced as to render farther preservation impossible. and, even then, my mortal terrors would listen to no reason -- would accept no consolation. i entered into a series of elaborate precautions. among other things, i had the family vault so remodelled as to admit of being readily opened from within. the slightest pressure upon a long lever that extended far into the tomb would cause the iron portal to fly back. there were arrangements also for the free admission of air and light, and convenient receptacles for food and water, within immediate reach of the coffin intended for my reception. this coffin was warmly and softly padded, and was provided with a lid, fashioned upon the principle of the vault-door, with the addition of springs so contrived that the feeblest movement of the body would be sufficient to set it at liberty. besides all this, there was suspended from the roof of the tomb, a large bell, the rope of which, it was designed, should extend through a hole in the coffin, and so be fastened to one of the hands of the corpse. but, alas? what avails the vigilance against the destiny of man? not even these well-contrived securities sufficed to save from the uttermost agonies of living inhumation, a wretch to these agonies foredoomed!there arrived an epoch -- as often before there had arrived -- in which i found myself emerging from total unconsciousness into the first feeble and indefinite sense of existence. slowly -- with a tortoise gradation -- approached the faint gray dawn of the psychal day. a torpid uneasiness. an apathetic endurance of dull pain. no care -- no hope -- no effort. then, after a long interval, a ringing in the ears; then, after a lapse still longer, a prickling or tingling sensation in the extremities; then a seemingly eternal period of pleasurable quiescence, during which the awakening feelings are struggling into thought; then a brief re-sinking into non-entity; then a sudden recovery. at length the slight quivering of an eyelid, and immediately thereupon, an electric shock of a terror, deadly and indefinite, which sends the blood in torrents from the temples to the heart. and now the first positive effort to think. and now the first endeavor to remember. and now a partial and evanescent success. and now the memory has so far regained its dominion, that, in some measure, i am cognizant of my state. i feel that i am not awaking from ordinary sleep. i recollect that i have been subject to catalepsy. and now, at last, as if by the rush of an ocean, my shuddering spirit is overwhelmed by the one grim danger -- by the one spectral and ever-prevalent idea.for some minutes after this fancy possessed me, i remained without motion. and why? i could not summon courage to move. i dared not make the effort which was to satisfy me of my fate -- and yet there was something at my heart which whispered me it was sure. despair -- such as no other species of wretchedness ever calls into being -- despair alone urged me, after long irresolution, to uplift the heavy lids of my eyes. i uplifted them. it was dark -- all dark. i knew that the fit was over. i knew that the crisis of my disorder had long passed. i knew that i had now fully recovered the use of my visual faculties -- and yet it was dark -- all dark -- the intense and utter raylessness of the night that endureth for evermore.i endeavored to shriek-, and my lips and my parched tongue moved convulsively together in the attempt -- but no voice issued from the cavernous lungs, which oppressed as if by the weight of some incumbent mountain, gasped and palpitated, with the heart, at every elaborate and struggling inspiration.the movement of the jaws, in this effort to cry aloud, showed me that they were bound up, as is usual with the dead. i felt, too, that i lay upon some hard substance, and by something similar my sides were, also, closely compressed. so far, i had not ventured to stir any of my limbs -- but now i violently threw up my arms, which had been lying at length, with the wrists crossed. they struck a solid wooden substance, which extended above my person at an elevation of not more than six inches from my face. i could no longer doubt that i reposed within a coffin at last.and now, amid all my infinite miseries, came sweetly the cherub hope -- for i thought of my precautions. i writhed, and made spasmodic exertions to force open the lid: it would not move. i felt my wrists for the bell-rope: it was not to be found. and now the comforter fled for ever, and a still sterner despair reigned triumphant; for i could not help perceiving the absence of the paddings which i had so carefully prepared -- and then, too, there came suddenly to my nostrils the strong peculiar odor of moist earth. the conclusion was irresistible. i was not within the vault. i had fallen into a trance while absent from home-while among strangers -- when, or how, i could not remember -- and it was they who had buried me as a dog -- nailed up in some common coffin -- and thrust deep, deep, and for ever, into some ordinary and nameless grave.as this awful conviction forced itself, thus, into the innermost chambers of my soul, i once again struggled to cry aloud. and in this second endeavor i succeeded. a long, wild, and continuous shriek, or yell of agony, resounded through the realms of the subterranean night."hillo! hillo, there!" said a gruff voice, in reply."what the devil's the matter now!" said a second."get out o' that!" said a third."what do you mean by yowling in that ere kind of style, like a cattymount?" said a fourth; and hereupon i was seized and shaken without ceremony, for several minutes, by a junto of very rough-looking individuals. they did not arouse me from my slumber -- for i was wide awake when i screamed -- but they restored me to the full possession of my memory.this adventure occurred near richmond, in virginia. accompanied by a friend, i had proceeded, upon a gunning expedition, some miles down the banks of the james river. night approached, and we were overtaken by a storm. the cabin of a small sloop lying at anchor in the stream, and laden with garden mould, afforded us the only available shelter. we made the best of it, and passed the night on board. i slept in one of the only two berths in the vessel -- and the berths of a sloop of sixty or twenty tons need scarcely be described. that which i occupied had no bedding of any kind. its extreme width was eighteen inches. the distance of its bottom from the deck overhead was precisely the same. i found it a matter of exceeding difficulty to squeeze myself in. nevertheless, i slept soundly, and the whole of my vision -- for it was no dream, and no nightmare -- arose naturally from the circumstances of my position -- from my ordinary bias of thought -- and from the difficulty, to which i have alluded, of collecting my senses, and especially of regaining my memory, for a long time after awaking from slumber. the men who shook me were the crew of the sloop, and some laborers engaged to unload it. from the load itself came the earthly smell. the bandage about the jaws was a silk handkerchief in which i had bound up my head, in default of my customary nightcap.the tortures endured, however, were indubitably quite equal for the time, to those of actual sepulture. they were fearfully -- they were inconceivably hideous; but out of evil proceeded good; for their very excess wrought in my spirit an inevitable revulsion. my soul acquired tone -- acquired temper. i went abroad. i took vigorous exercise. i breathed the free air of heaven. i thought upon other subjects than death. i discarded my medical books. "buchan" i burned. i read no "night thoughts" -- no fustian about churchyards -- no bugaboo tales -- such as this. in short, i became a new man, and lived a man's life. from that memorable night, i dismissed forever my charnel apprehensions, and with them vanished the cataleptic disorder, of which, perhaps, they had been less the consequence than the cause.there are moments when, even to the sober eye of reason, the world of our sad humanity may assume the semblance of a hell -- but the imagination of man is no carathis, to explore with impunity its every cavern. alas! the grim legion of sepulchral terrors cannot be regarded as altogether fanciful -- but, like the demons in whose company afrasiab made his voyage down the oxus, they must sleep, or they will devour us -- they must be suffered to slumber, or we perish.at paris, just after dark one gusty evening in the autumn of 18-, i was enjoying the twofold luxury of meditation and a meerschaum, in company with my friend c. auguste dupin, in his little back library, or book-closet, au troisiãªme, no. 33, rue dunã´t, faubourg st. germain. for one hour at least we had maintained a profound silence; while each, to any casual observer, might have seemed intently and exclusively occupied with the curling eddies of smoke that oppressed the atmosphere of the chamber. for myself, however, i was mentally discussing certain topics which had formed matter for conversation between us at an earlier period of the evening; i mean the affair of the rue morgue, and the mystery attending the murder of marie rogãªt. i looked upon it, therefore, as something of a coincidence, when the door of our apartment was thrown open and admitted our old acquaintance, monsieur g--, the prefect of the parisian police.we gave him a hearty welcome; for there was nearly half as much of the entertaining as of the contemptible about the man, and we had not seen him for several years. we had been sitting in the dark, and dupin now arose for the purpose of lighting a lamp, but sat down again, without doing so, upon g.'s saying that he had called to consult us, or rather to ask the opinion of my friend, about some official business which had occasioned a great deal of trouble."if it is any point requiring reflection," observed dupin, as he forebore to enkindle the wick, "we shall examine it to better purpose in the dark.""that is another of your odd notions," said the prefect, who had a fashion of calling every thing "odd" that was beyond his comprehension, and thus lived amid an absolute legion of "oddities.""very true," said dupin, as he supplied his visiter with a pipe, and rolled towards him a comfortable chair."and what is the difficulty now?" i asked. "nothing more in the assassination way, i hope?""oh no; nothing of that nature. the fact is, the business is very simple indeed, and i make no doubt that we can manage it sufficiently well ourselves; but then i thought dupin would like to hear the details of it, because it is so excessively odd.""simple and odd," said dupin."why, yes; and not exactly that, either. the fact is, we have all been a good deal puzzled because the affair is so simple, and yet baffles us altogether.""perhaps it is the very simplicity of the thing which puts you at fault," said my friend."what nonsense you do talk!" replied the prefect, laughing heartily."perhaps the mystery is a little too plain," said dupin."oh, good heavens! who ever heard of such an idea?""a little too self-evident.""ha! ha! ha - ha! ha! ha! - ho! ho! ho!" roared our visiter, profoundly amused, "oh, dupin, you will be the death of me yet!""and what, after all, is the matter on hand?" i asked."why, i will tell you," replied the prefect, as he gave a long, steady and contemplative puff, and settled himself in his chair. "i will tell you in a few words; but, before i begin, let me caution you that this is an affair demanding the greatest secrecy, and that i should most probably lose the position i now hold, were it known that i confided it to any one.""proceed," said i."or not," said dupin."well, then; i have received personal information, from a very high quarter, that a certain document of the last importance, has been purloined from the royal apartments. the individual who purloined it is known; this beyond a doubt; he was seen to take it. it is known, also, that it still remains in his possession.""how is this known?" asked dupin."it is clearly inferred," replied the prefect, "from the nature of the document, and from the non-appearance of certain results which would at once arise from its passing out of the robber's possession; that is to say, from his employing it as he must design in the end to employ it.""be a little more explicit," i said."well, i may venture so far as to say that the paper gives its holder a certain power in a certain quarter where such power is immensely valuable." the prefect was fond of the cant of diplomacy."still i do not quite understand," said dupin."no? well; the disclosure of the document to a third person, who shall be nameless, would bring in question the honor of a personage of most exalted station; and this fact gives the holder of the document an ascendancy over the illustrious personage whose honor and peace are so jeopardized.""but this ascendancy," i interposed, "would depend upon the robber's knowledge of the loser's knowledge of the robber. who would dare -""the thief," said g., "is the minister d--, who dares all things, those unbecoming as well as those becoming a man. the method of the theft was not less ingenious than bold. the document in question - a letter, to be frank - had been received by the personage robbed while alone in the royal boudoir. during its perusal she was suddenly interrupted by the entrance of the other exalted personage from whom especially it was her wish to conceal it. after a hurried and vain endeavor to thrust it in a drawer, she was forced to place it, open as it was, upon a table. the address, however, was uppermost, and, the contents thus unexposed, the letter escaped notice. at this juncture enters the minister d--. his lynx eye immediately perceives the paper, recognises the handwriting of the address, observes the confusion of the personage addressed, and fathoms her secret. after some business transactions, hurried through in his ordinary manner, he produces a letter somewhat similar to the one in question, opens it, pretends to read it, and then places it in close juxtaposition to the other. again he converses, for some fifteen minutes, upon the public affairs. at length, in taking leave, he takes also from the table the letter to which he had no claim. its rightful owner saw, but, of course, dared not call attention to the act, in the presence of the third personage who stood at her elbow. the minister decamped; leaving his own letter - one of no importance - upon the table.""here, then," said dupin to me, "you have precisely what you demand to make the ascendancy complete - the robber's knowledge of the loser's knowledge of the robber.""yes," replied the prefect; "and the power thus attained has, for some months past, been wielded, for political purposes, to a very dangerous extent. the personage robbed is more thoroughly convinced, every day, of the necessity of reclaiming her letter. but this, of course, cannot be done openly. in fine, driven to despair, she has committed the matter to me.""than whom," said dupin, amid a perfect whirlwind of smoke, "no more sagacious agent could, i suppose, be desired, or even imagined.""you flatter me," replied the prefect; "but it is possible that some such opinion may have been entertained.""it is clear," said i, "as you observe, that the letter is still in possession of the minister; since it is this possession, and not any employment of the letter, which bestows the power. with the employment the power departs.""true," said g.; "and upon this conviction i proceeded. my first care was to make thorough search of the minister's hotel; and here my chief embarrassment lay in the necessity of searching without his knowledge. beyond all things, i have been warned of the danger which would result from giving him reason to suspect our design.""but," said i, "you are quite au fait in these investigations. the parisian police have done this thing often before.""o yes; and for this reason i did not despair. the habits of the minister gave me, too, a great advantage. he is frequently absent from home all night. his servants are by no means numerous. they sleep at a distance from their master's apartment, and, being chiefly neapolitans, are readily made drunk. i have keys, as you know, with which i can open any chamber or cabinet in paris. for three months a night has not passed, during the greater part of which i have not been engaged, personally, in ransacking the d-- hotel. my honor is interested, and, to mention a great secret, the reward is enormous. so i did not abandon the search until i had become fully satisfied that the thief is a more astute man than myself. i fancy that i have investigated every nook and corner of the premises in which it is possible that the paper can be concealed.""but is it not possible," i suggested, "that although the letter may be in possession of the minister, as it unquestionably is, he may have concealed it elsewhere than upon his own premises?""this is barely possible," said dupin. "the present peculiar condition of affairs at court, and especially of those intrigues in which d-- is known to be involved, would render the instant availability of the document - its susceptibility of being produced at a moment's notice - a point of nearly equal importance with its possession.""its susceptibility of being produced?" said i."that is to say, of being destroyed," said dupin."true," i observed; "the paper is clearly then upon the premises. as for its being upon the person of the minister, we may consider that as out of the question.""entirely," said the prefect. "he has been twice waylaid, as if by footpads, and his person rigorously searched under my own inspection.""you might have spared yourself this trouble," said dupin. "d--, i presume, is not altogether a fool, and, if not, must have anticipated these waylayings, as a matter of course.""not altogether a fool," said g., "but then he's a poet, which i take to be only one remove from a fool.""true," said dupin, after a long and thoughtful whiff from his meerschaum, "although i have been guilty of certain doggrel myself.""suppose you detail," said i, "the particulars of your search.""why the fact is, we took our time, and we searched every where. i have had long experience in these affairs. i took the entire building, room by room; devoting the nights of a whole week to each. we examined, first, the furniture of each apartment. we opened every possible drawer; and i presume you know that, to a properly trained police agent, such a thing as a secret drawer is impossible. any man is a dolt who permits a 'secret' drawer to escape him in a search of this kind. the thing is so plain. there is a certain amount of bulk - of space - to be accounted for in every cabinet. then we have accurate rules. the fiftieth part of a line could not escape us. after the cabinets we took the chairs. the cushions we probed with the fine long needles you have seen me employ. from the tables we removed the tops.""why so?""sometimes the top of a table, or other similarly arranged piece of furniture, is removed by the person wishing to conceal an article; then the leg is excavated, the article deposited within the cavity, and the top replaced. the bottoms and tops of bedposts are employed in the same way.""but could not the cavity be detected by sounding?" i asked."by no means, if, when the article is deposited, a sufficient wadding of cotton be placed around it. besides, in our case, we were obliged to proceed without noise.""but you could not have removed - you could not have taken to pieces all articles of furniture in which it would have been possible to make a deposit in the manner you mention. a letter may be compressed into a thin spiral roll, not differing much in shape or bulk from a large knitting-needle, and in this form it might be inserted into the rung of a chair, for example. you did not take to pieces all the chairs?""certainly not; but we did better - we examined the rungs of every chair in the hotel, and, indeed the jointings of every description of furniture, by the aid of a most powerful microscope. had there been any traces of recent disturbance we should not have failed to detect it instantly. a single grain of gimlet-dust, for example, would have been as obvious as an apple. any disorder in the glueing - any unusual gaping in the joints - would have sufficed to insure detection.""i presume you looked to the mirrors, between the boards and the plates, and you probed the beds and the bed-clothes, as well as the curtains and carpets.""that of course; and when we had absolutely completed every particle of the furniture in this way, then we examined the house itself. we divided its entire surface into compartments, which we numbered, so that none might be missed; then we scrutinized each individual square inch throughout the premises, including the two houses immediately adjoining, with the microscope, as before.""the two houses adjoining!" i exclaimed; "you must have had a great deal of trouble.""we had; but the reward offered is prodigious!""you include the grounds about the houses?""all the grounds are paved with brick. they gave us comparatively little trouble. we examined the moss between the bricks, and found it undisturbed.""you looked among d--'s papers, of course, and into the books of the library?""certainly; we opened every package and parcel; we not only opened every book, but we turned over every leaf in each volume, not contenting ourselves with a mere shake, according to the fashion of some of our police officers. we also measured the thickness of every book-cover, with the most accurate admeasurement, and applied to each the most jealous scrutiny of the microscope. had any of the bindings been recently meddled with, it would have been utterly impossible that the fact should have escaped observation. some five or six volumes, just from the hands of the binder, we carefully probed, longitudinally, with the needles.""you explored the floors beneath the carpets?""beyond doubt. we removed every carpet, and examined the boards with the microscope.""and the paper on the walls?""yes.""you looked into the cellars?""we did.""then," i said, "you have been making a miscalculation, and the letter is not upon the premises, as you suppose.""i fear you are right there," said the prefect. "and now, dupin, what would you advise me to do?""to make a thorough re-search of the premises.""that is absolutely needless," replied g--. "i am not more sure that i breathe than i am that the letter is not at the hotel.""i have no better advice to give you," said dupin. "you have, of course, an accurate description of the letter?""oh yes!" - and here the prefect, producing a memorandum-book proceeded to read aloud a minute account of the internal, and especially of the external appearance of the missing document. soon after finishing the perusal of this description, he took his departure, more entirely depressed in spirits than i had ever known the good gentleman before. in about a month afterwards he paid us another visit, and found us occupied very nearly as before. he took a pipe and a chair and entered into some ordinary conversation. at length i said, -"well, but g--, what of the purloined letter? i presume you have at last made up your mind that there is no such thing as overreaching the minister?""confound him, say i - yes; i made the re-examination, however, as dupin suggested - but it was all labor lost, as i knew it would be.""how much was the reward offered, did you say?" asked dupin."why, a very great deal - a very liberal reward - i don't like to say how much, precisely; but one thing i will say, that i wouldn't mind giving my individual check for fifty thousand francs to any one who could obtain me that letter. the fact is, it is becoming of more and more importance every day; and the reward has been lately doubled. if it were trebled, however, i could do no more than i have done.""why, yes," said dupin, drawlingly, between the whiffs of his meerschaum, "i really - think, g--, you have not exerted yourself - to the utmost in this matter. you might - do a little more, i think, eh?""how? - in what way?'"why - puff, puff - you might - puff, puff - employ counsel in the matter, eh? - puff, puff, puff. do you remember the story they tell of abernethy?""no; hang abernethy!""to be sure! hang him and welcome. but, once upon a time, a certain rich miser conceived the design of spunging upon this abernethy for a medical opinion. getting up, for this purpose, an ordinary conversation in a private company, he insinuated his case to the physician, as that of an imaginary individual." 'we will suppose,' said the miser, 'that his symptoms are such and such; now, doctor, what would you have directed him to take?'" 'take!' said abernethy, 'why, take advice, to be sure.' ""but," said the prefect, a little discomposed, "i am perfectly willing to take advice, and to pay for it. i would really give fifty thousand francs to any one who would aid me in the matter.""in that case," replied dupin, opening a drawer, and producing a check-book, "you may as well fill me up a check for the amount mentioned. when you have signed it, i will hand you the letter."i was astounded. the prefect appeared absolutely thunder-stricken. for some minutes he remained speechless and motionless, looking incredulously at my friend with open mouth, and eyes that seemed starting from their sockets; then, apparently recovering himself in some measure, he seized a pen, and after several pauses and vacant stares, finally filled up and signed a check for fifty thousand francs, and handed it across the table to dupin. the latter examined it carefully and deposited it in his pocket-book; then, unlocking an escritoire, took thence a letter and gave it to the prefect. this functionary grasped it in a perfect agony of joy, opened it with a trembling hand, cast a rapid glance at its contents, and then, scrambling and struggling to the door, rushed at length unceremoniously from the room and from the house, without having uttered a syllable since dupin had requested him to fill up the check.when he had gone, my friend entered into some explanations."the parisian police," he said, "are exceedingly able in their way. they are persevering, ingenious, cunning, and thoroughly versed in the knowledge which their duties seem chiefly to demand. thus, when g-- detailed to us his made of searching the premises at the hotel d--, i felt entire confidence in his having made a satisfactory investigation - so far as his labors extended.""so far as his labors extended?" said i."yes," said dupin. "the measures adopted were not only the best of their kind, but carried out to absolute perfection. had the letter been deposited within the range of their search, these fellows would, beyond a question, have found it."i merely laughed - but he seemed quite serious in all that he said."the measures, then," he continued, " were good in their kind, and well executed; their defect lay in their being inapplicable to the case, and to the man. a certain set of highly ingenious resources are, with the prefect, a sort of procrustean bed, to which he forcibly adapts his designs. but he perpetually errs by being too deep or too shallow, for the matter in hand; and many a schoolboy is a better reasoner than he. i knew one about eight years of age, whose success at guessing in the game of 'even and odd' attracted universal admiration. this game is simple, and is played with marbles. one player holds in his hand a number of these toys, and demands of another whether that number is even or odd. if the guess is right, the guesser wins one; if wrong, he loses one. the boy to whom i allude won all the marbles of the school. of course he had some principle of guessing; and this lay in mere observation and admeasurement of the astuteness of his opponents. for example, an arrant simpleton is his opponent, and, holding up his closed hand, asks, 'are they even or odd?' our schoolboy replies, 'odd,' and loses; but upon the second trial he wins, for he then says to himself, 'the simpleton had them even upon the first trial, and his amount of cunning is just sufficient to make him have them odd upon the second; i will therefore guess odd;' - he guesses odd, and wins. now, with a simpleton a degree above the first, he would have reasoned thus: 'this fellow finds that in the first instance i guessed odd, and, in the second, he will propose to himself, upon the first impulse, a simple variation from even to odd, as did the first simpleton; but then a second thought will suggest that this is too simple a variation, and finally he will decide upon putting it even as before. i will therefore guess even;' - he guesses even, and wins. now this mode of reasoning in the schoolboy, whom his fellows termed 'lucky,' - what, in its last analysis, is it?""it is merely," i said, "an identification of the reasoner's intellect with that of his opponent.""it is," said dupin; "and, upon inquiring, of the boy by what means he effected the thoroughidentification in which his success consisted, i received answer as follows: 'when i wish to find out how wise, or how stupid, or how good, or how wicked is any one, or what are his thoughts at the moment, i fashion the expression of my face, as accurately as possible, in accordance with the expression of his, and then wait to see what thoughts or sentiments arise in my mind or heart, as if to match or correspond with the expression.' this response of the schoolboy lies at the bottom of all the spurious profundity which has been attributed to rochefoucault, to la bougive, to machiavelli, and to campanella.""and the identification," i said, "of the reasoner's intellect with that of his opponent, depends, if i understand you aright, upon the accuracy with which the opponent's intellect is admeasured.""for its practical value it depends upon this," replied dupin; "and the prefect and his cohort fail so frequently, first, by default of this identification, and, secondly, by ill-admeasurement, or rather through non-admeasurement, of the intellect with which they are engaged. they consider only their own ideas of ingenuity; and, in searching for anything hidden, advert only to the modes in which they would have hidden it. they are right in this much - that their own ingenuity is a faithful representative of that of the mass; but when the cunning of the individual felon is diverse in character from their own, the felon foils them, of course. this always happens when it is above their own, and very usually when it is below. they have no variation of principle in their investigations; at best, when urged by some unusual emergency - by some extraordinary reward - they extend or exaggerate their old modes of practice, without touching their principles. what, for example, in this case of d--, has been done to vary the principle of action? what is all this boring, and probing, and sounding, and scrutinizing with the microscope and dividing the surface of the building into registered square inches - what is it all but an exaggeration of the application of the one principle or set of principles of search, which are based upon the one set of notions regarding human ingenuity, to which the prefect, in the long routine of his duty, has been accustomed? do you not see he has taken it for granted that all men proceed to conceal a letter, - not exactly in a gimlet hole bored in a chair-leg - but, at least, in someout-of-the-way hole or corner suggested by the same tenor of thought which would urge a man to secrete a letter in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg? and do you not see also, that such recherchã©s nooks for concealment are adapted only for ordinary occasions, and would be adopted only by ordinary intellects; for, in all cases of concealment, a disposal of the article concealed - a disposal of it in this recherchã© manner, - is, in the very first instance, presumable and presumed; and thus its discovery depends, not at all upon the acumen, but altogether upon the mere care, patience, and determination of the seekers; and where the case is of importance - or, what amounts to the same thing in the policial eyes, when the reward is of magnitude, - the qualities in question have never been known to fail. you will now understand what i meant in suggesting that, had the purloined letter been hidden any where within the limits of the prefect's examination - in other words, had the principle of its concealment been comprehended within the principles of the prefect - its discovery would have been a matter altogether beyond question. this functionary, however, has been thoroughly mystified; and the remote source of his defeat lies in the supposition that the minister is a fool, because he has acquired renown as a poet. all fools are poets; this the prefect feels; and he is merely guilty of a non distributio medii in thence inferring that all poets are fools.""but is this really the poet?" i asked. "there are two brothers, i know; and both have attained reputation in letters. the minister i believe has written learnedly on the differential calculus. he is a mathematician, and no poet.""you are mistaken; i know him well; he is both. as poet and mathematician, he would reason well; as mere mathematician, he could not have reasoned at all, and thus would have been at the mercy of the prefect.""you surprise me," i said, "by these opinions, which have been contradicted by the voice of the world. you do not mean to set at naught the well-digested idea of centuries. the mathematical reason has long been regarded as the reason par excellence."" 'il y a ã  pariã¨r,' " replied dupin, quoting from chamfort, " 'que toute idã©e publique, toute convention reã§ue est une sottise, car elle a convenue au plus grand nombre.' the mathematicians, i grant you, have done their best to promulgate the popular error to which you allude, and which is none the less an error for its promulgation as truth. with an art worthy a better cause, for example, they have insinuated the term 'analysis' into application to algebra. the french are the originators of this particular deception; but if a term is of any importance - if words derive any value from applicability - then 'analysis' conveys 'algebra' about as much as, in latin, 'ambitus' implies 'ambition,' 'religio' 'religion,' or 'homines honesti,' a set of honorablemen.""you have a quarrel on hand, i see," said i, "with some of the algebraists of paris; but proceed.""i dispute the availability, and thus the value, of that reason which is cultivated in any especial form other than the abstractly logical. i dispute, in particular, the reason educed by mathematical study. the mathematics are the science of form and quantity; mathematical reasoning is merely logic applied to observation upon form and quantity. the great error lies in supposing that even the truths of what is called pure algebra, are abstract or general truths. and this error is so egregious that i am confounded at the universality with which it has been received. mathematical axioms are notaxioms of general truth. what is true of relation - of form and quantity - is often grossly false in regard to morals, for example. in this latter science it is very usually untrue that the aggregated parts are equal to the whole. in chemistry also the axiom fails. in the consideration of motive it fails; for two motives, each of a given value, have not, necessarily, a value when united, equal to the sum of their values apart. there are numerous other mathematical truths which are only truths within the limits of relation. but the mathematician argues, from his finite truths, through habit, as if they were of an absolutely general applicability - as the world indeed imagines them to be. bryant, in his very learned 'mythology,' mentions an analogous source of error, when he says that 'although the pagan fables are not believed, yet we forget ourselves continually, and make inferences from them as existing realities.' with the algebraists, however, who are pagans themselves, the 'pagan fables' are believed, and the inferences are made, not so much through lapse of memory, as through an unaccountable addling of the brains. in short, i never yet encountered the mere mathematician who could be trusted out of equal roots, or one who did not clandestinely hold it as a point of his faith that x2+px was absolutely and unconditionally equal to q. say to one of these gentlemen, by way of experiment, if you please, that you believe occasions may occur where x2+px is not altogether equal to q, and, having made him understand what you mean, get out of his reach as speedily as convenient, for, beyond doubt, he will endeavor to knock you down."i mean to say," continued dupin, while i merely laughed at his last observations, "that if the minister had been no more than a mathematician, the prefect would have been under no necessity of giving me this check. i know him, however, as both mathematician and poet, and my measures were adapted to his capacity, with reference to the circumstances by which he was surrounded. i knew him as a courtier, too, and as a bold intriguant. such a man, i considered, could not fail to be aware of the ordinary policial modes of action. he could not have failed to anticipate - and events have proved that he did not fail to anticipate - the waylayings to which he was subjected. he must have foreseen, i reflected, the secret investigations of his premises. his frequent absences from home at night, which were hailed by the prefect as certain aids to his success, i regarded only as ruses, to afford opportunity for thorough search to the police, and thus the sooner to impress them with the conviction to which g--, in fact, did finally arrive - the conviction that the letter was not upon the premises. i felt, also, that the whole train of thought, which i was at some pains in detailing to you just now, concerning the invariable principle of policial action in searches for articles concealed - i felt that this whole train of thought would necessarily pass through the mind of the minister. it would imperatively lead him to despise all the ordinary nooks of concealment. he could not, i reflected, be so weak as not to see that the most intricate and remote recess of his hotel would be as open as his commonest closets to the eyes, to the probes, to the gimlets, and to the microscopes of the prefect. i saw, in fine, that he would be driven, as a matter of course, to simplicity, if not deliberately induced to it as a matter of choice. you will remember, perhaps, how desperately the prefect laughed when i suggested, upon our first interview, that it was just possible this mystery troubled him so much on account of its being so very self-evident.""yes," said i, "i remember his merriment well. i really thought he would have fallen into convulsions.""the material world," continued dupin, "abounds with very strict analogies to the immaterial; and thus some color of truth has been given to the rhetorical dogma, that metaphor, or simile, may be made to strengthen an argument, as well as to embellish a description. the principle of the vis inertiã¦, for example, seems to be identical in physics and metaphysics. it is not more true in the former, that a large body is with more difficulty set in motion than a smaller one, and that its subsequent momentum is commensurate with this difficulty, than it is, in the latter, that intellects of the vaster capacity, while more forcible, more constant, and more eventful in their movements than those of inferior grade, are yet the less readily moved, and more embarrassed and full of hesitation in the first few steps of their progress. again: have you ever noticed which of the street signs, over the shop- doors, are the most attractive of attention?""i have never given the matter a thought," i said."there is a game of puzzles," he resumed, "which is played upon a map. one party playing requires another to find a given word - the name of town, river, state or empire - any word, in short, upon the motley and perplexed surface of the chart. a novice in the game generally seeks to embarrass his opponents by giving them the most minutely lettered names; but the adept selects such words as stretch, in large characters, from one end of the chart to the other. these, like the over-largely lettered signs and placards of the street, escape observation by dint of being excessively obvious; and here the physical oversight is precisely analogous with the moral inapprehension by which the intellect suffers to pass unnoticed those considerations which are too obtrusively and too palpably self-evident. but this is a point, it appears, somewhat above or beneath the understanding of the prefect. he never once thought it probable, or possible, that the minister had deposited the letter immediately beneath the nose of the whole world, by way of best preventing any portion of that world from perceiving it."but the more i reflected upon the daring, dashing, and discriminating ingenuity of d--; upon the fact that the document must always have been at hand, if he intended to use it to good purpose; and upon the decisive evidence, obtained by the prefect, that it was not hidden within the limits of that dignitary's ordinary search - the more satisfied i became that, to conceal this letter, the minister had resorted to the comprehensive and sagacious expedient of not attempting to conceal it at all."full of these ideas, i prepared myself with a pair of green spectacles, and called one fine morning, quite by accident, at the ministerial hotel. i found d-- at home, yawning, lounging, and dawdling, as usual, and pretending to be in the last extremity of ennui. he is, perhaps, the most really energetic human being now alive - but that is only when nobody sees him."to be even with him, i complained of my weak eyes, and lamented the necessity of the spectacles, under cover of which i cautiously and thoroughly surveyed the whole apartment, while seemingly intent only upon the conversation of my host."i paid especial attention to a large writing-table near which he sat, and upon which lay confusedly, some miscellaneous letters and other papers, with one or two musical instruments and a few books. here, however, after a long and very deliberate scrutiny, i saw nothing to excite particular suspicion."at length my eyes, in going the circuit of the room, fell upon a trumpery fillagree card-rack of pasteboard, that hung dangling by a dirty blue ribbon, from a little brass knob just beneath the middle of the mantel-piece. in this rack, which had three or four compartments, were five or six visiting cards and a solitary letter. this last was much soiled and crumpled. it was torn nearly in two, across the middle - as if a design, in the first instance, to tear it entirely up as worthless, had been altered, or stayed, in the second. it had a large black seal, bearing the d-- cipher very conspicuously, and was addressed, in a diminutive female hand, to d--, the minister, himself. it was thrust carelessly, and even, as it seemed, contemptuously, into one of the uppermost divisions of the rack."no sooner had i glanced at this letter, than i concluded it to be that of which i was in search. to be sure, it was, to all appearance, radically different from the one of which the prefect had read us so minute a description. here the seal was large and black, with the d-- cipher; there it was small and red, with the ducal arms of the s-- family. here, the address, to the minister, diminutive and feminine; there the superscription, to a certain royal personage, was markedly bold and decided; the size alone formed a point of correspondence. but, then, the radicalness of these differences, which was excessive; the dirt; the soiled and torn condition of the paper, so inconsistent with the true methodical habits of d--, and so suggestive of a design to delude the beholder into an idea of the worthlessness of the document; these things, together with the hyper-obtrusive situation of this document, full in the view of every visiter, and thus exactly in accordance with the conclusions to which i had previously arrived; these things, i say, were strongly corroborative of suspicion, in one who came with the intention to suspect."i protracted my visit as long as possible, and, while i maintained a most animated discussion with the minister upon a topic which i knew well had never failed to interest and excite him, i kept my attention really riveted upon the letter. in this examination, i committed to memory its external appearance and arrangement in the rack; and also fell, at length, upon a discovery which set at rest whatever trivial doubt i might have entertained. in scrutinizing the edges of the paper, i observed them to be more chafed than seemed necessary. they presented the broken appearance which is manifested when a stiff paper, having been once folded and pressed with a folder, is refolded in a reversed direction, in the same creases or edges which had formed the original fold. this discovery was sufficient. it was clear to me that the letter had been turned, as a glove, inside out, re-directed, and re-sealed. i bade the minister good morning, and took my departure at once, leaving a gold snuff-box upon the table."the next morning i called for the snuff-box, when we resumed, quite eagerly, the conversation of the preceding day. while thus engaged, however, a loud report, as if of a pistol, was heard immediately beneath the windows of the hotel, and was succeeded by a series of fearful screams, and the shoutings of a terrified mob. d-- rushed to a casement, threw it open, and looked out. in the meantime, i stepped to the card-rack took the letter, put it in my pocket, and replaced it by a fac-simile, (so far as regards externals,) which i had carefully prepared at my lodgings - imitating the d-- cipher, very readily, by means of a seal formed of bread."the disturbance in the street had been occasioned by the frantic behavior of a man with a musket. he had fired it among a crowd of women and children. it proved, however, to have been without ball, and the fellow was suffered to go his way as a lunatic or a drunkard. when he had gone, d-- came from the window, whither i had followed him immediately upon securing the object in view. soon afterwards i bade him farewell. the pretended lunatic was a man in my own pay.""but what purpose had you," i asked, "in replacing the letter by a fac-simile? would it not have been better, at the first visit, to have seized it openly, and departed?""d--," replied dupin, "is a desperate man, and a man of nerve. his hotel, too, is not without attendants devoted to his interests. had i made the wild attempt you suggest, i might never have left the ministerial presence alive. the good people of paris might have heard of me no more. but i had an object apart from these considerations. you know my political prepossessions. in this matter, i act as a partisan of the lady concerned. for eighteen months the minister has had her in his power. she has now him in hers - since, being unaware that the letter is not in his possession, he will proceed with his exactions as if it was. thus will he inevitably commit himself, at once, to his political destruction. his downfall, too, will not be more precipitate than awkward. it is all very well to talk about the facilis descensus averni; but in all kinds of climbing, as catalani said of singing, it is far more easy to get up than to come down. in the present instance i have no sympathy - at least no pity - for him who descends. he is that monstrum horrendum, an unprincipled man of genius. i confess, however, that i should like very well to know the precise character of his thoughts, when, being defied by her whom the prefect terms 'a certain personage' he is reduced to opening the letter which i left for him in the card-rack.""how? did you put any thing particular in it?""why - it did not seem altogether right to leave the interior blank - that would have been insulting. d--, at vienna once, did me an evil turn, which i told him, quite good-humoredly, that i should remember. so, as i knew he would feel some curiosity in regard to the identity of the person who had outwitted him, i thought it a pity not to give him a clue. he is well acquainted with my ms., and i just copied into the middle of the blank sheet the words -" '-- -- un dessein si funeste, s'il n'est digne d'atrã©e, est digne de thyeste.they are to be found in crebillon's 'atrã©e.' "true!-nervous--very, very dreadfully nervous i had been and am! but why will you say that i am mad? the disease had sharpened my senses--not destroyed--not dulled them. above all was the sense of hearing acute. i heard all things in the heaven and in the earth. i heard many things in hell. how, then, am i mad? hearken! and observe how healthily--how calmly i can tell you the whole story.it is impossible to tell how first the idea entered my brain; but once conceived, it haunted me day and night. object there was none. passion there was none. i loved the old man. he had never wronged me. he had never given me insult. for his gold i had no desire. i think it was his eye! yes, it was this! one of his eyes resembled that of a vulture--a pale blue eye, with a film over it. whenever it fell upon me, my blood ran cold; and so by degrees--very gradually--i made up my mind to take the life of the old man, and thus rid myself of the eye forever.now this is the point. you fancy me mad. madmen know nothing. but you should have seen me. you should have seen how wisely i proceeded--with what caution--with what foresight--with what dissimulation i went to work!i was never kinder to the old man than during the whole week before i killed him. and every night, about midnight, i turned the latch of his door and opened it--oh, so gently! and then, when i had made an opening sufficient for my head, i put in a dark lantern, all closed, closed, so that no light shone out, and then i thrust in my head. oh, you would have laughed to see how cunningly i thrust it in! i moved it slowly--very, very slowly, so that i might not disturb the old man's sleep. it took me an hour to place my whole head within the opening so far that i could see him as he lay upon his bed. ha!--would a madman have been so wise as this? and then, when my head was well in the room, i undid the lantern cautiously--oh, so cautiously--cautiously (for the hinges creaked)--i undid it just so much that a single thin ray fell upon the vulture eye. and this i did for seven long nights--every night just at midnight--but i found the eye always closed; and so it was impossible to do the work; for it was not the old man who vexed me, but his evil eye. and every morning, when the day broke, i went boldly into the chamber, and spoke courageously to him, calling him by name in a hearty tone, and inquiring how he had passed the night. so you see he would have been a very profound old man, indeed, to suspect that every night, just at twelve, i looked in upon him while he slept.upon the eighth night i was more than usually cautious in opening the door. a watch's minute hand moves more quickly than did mine. never before that night had i felt the extent of my own powers--of my sagacity. i could scarcely contain my feelings of triumph. to think that there i was, opening the door, little by little, and he not even to dream of my secret deeds or thoughts. i fairly chuckled at the idea; and perhaps he heard me; for he moved on the bed suddenly, as if startled. now you may think that i drew back--but no. his room was as black as pitch with the thick darkness (for the shutters were close fastened, through fear of robbers), and so i knew that he could not see the opening of the door, and i kept pushing it on steadily, steadily.i had my head in, and was about to open the lantern, when my thumb slipped upon the tin fastening, and the old man sprang up in bed, crying out: "who's there?"i kept quite still and said nothing. for a whole hour i did not move a muscle, and in the meantime i did not hear him lie down. he was still sitting up in the bed listening;--just as i have done, night after night, hearkening to the death watches in the wall.presently i heard a slight groan, and i knew it was the groan of mortal terror. it was not a groan of pain or grief--oh no!--it was the low stifled sound that arises from the bottom of the soul when overcharged with awe. i knew the sound well. many a night, just at midnight, when all the world slept, it has welled up from my own bosom, deepening, with its dreadful echo, the terrors that distracted me. i say i knew it well. i knew what the old man felt, and pitied him, although i chuckled at heart. i knew that he had been lying awake ever since the first slight noise, when he had turned in the bed. his fears had been ever since growing upon him. he had been trying to fancy them causeless, but could not. he had been saying to himself: "it is nothing but the wind in the chimney--it is only a mouse crossing the floor," or "it is merely a cricket which has made a single chirp." yes, he had been trying to comfort himself with these suppositions; but he had found all in vain. all in vain; because death, in approaching him. had stalked with his black shadow before him, and enveloped the victim. and it was the mournful influence of the unperceived shadow that caused him to feel--although he neither saw nor heard--to feel the presence of my head within the room.when i had waited a long time, very patiently, without hearing him lie down, i resolved to open a little--a very, very little crevice in the lantern. so i opened it--you cannot imagine how stealthily, stealthily--until, at length, a single dim ray, like the thread of the spider, shot from out the crevice and full upon the vulture eye.it was open--wide, wide open--and i grew furious as i gazed upon it. i saw it with perfect distinctness--all a dull blue, with a hideous veil over it that chilled the very marrow in my bones; but i could see nothing else of the old man's face or person: for i had directed the ray, as if by instinct, precisely upon the damned spot.and now--have i not told you that what you mistake for madness is but over-acuteness of the senses?--now, i say, there came to my ears a low, dull, quick sound, such as a watch makes when enveloped in cotton. i knew that sound well too. it was the beating of the old man's heart. it increased my fury, as the beating of a drum stimulates the soldier into courage.but even yet i refrained and kept still. i scarcely breathed. i held the lantern motionless. i tried how steadily i could maintain the ray upon the eye. meantime the hellish tattoo of the heart increased. it grew quicker and quicker' and louder and louder every instant. the old man's terror must have been extreme! it grew louder, i say, louder every moment!--do you mark me well? i have told you that i am nervous: so i am. and now at the dead hour of night, amid the dreadful silence of that old house, so strange a noise as this excited me to uncontrollable terror. yet, for some minutes longer i refrained and stood still. but the beating grew louder, louder! i thought the heart must burst. and now a new anxiety seized me--the sound would be heard by a neighbor! the old man's hour had come! with a loud yell, i threw open the lantern and leaped into the room. he shrieked once--once only. in an instant i dragged him to the floor, and pulled the heavy bed over him. i then smiled gaily, to find the deed so far done. but, for many minutes, the heart beat on with a muffled sound. this, however, did not vex me; it would not be heard through the wall. at length it ceased. the old man was dead. i removed the bed and examined the corpse. yes, he was stone, stone dead. i placed my hand upon the heart and held it there many minutes. there was no pulsation. he was stone dead. his eye would trouble me no more.if still you think me mad, you will think so no longer when i describe the wise precautions i took for the concealment of the body. the night waned, and i worked hastily, but in silence. first of all i dismembered the corpse. i cut off the head and the arms and the legs.i then took up three planks from the flooring of the chamber, and deposited all between the scantlings. i then replaced the boards so cleverly, so cunningly, that no human eye--not even his--could have detected anything wrong. there was nothing to wash out--no stain of any kind--no blood-spot whatever. i had been too wary for that. a tub had caught all--ha! ha!when i had made an end of these labors, it was four o'clock--still dark as midnight. as the bell sounded the hour, there came a knocking at the street door. i went down to open it with a light heart--for what had i now to fear? there entered three men, who introduced themselves, with perfect suavity, as officers of the police. a shriek had been heard by a neighbor during the night: suspicion of foul play had been aroused; information had been lodged at the police office, and they (the officers) had been deputed to search the premises.i smiled--for what had i to fear? i bade the gentlemen welcome. the shriek, i said, was my own in a dream. the old man, i mentioned, was absent in the country. i took my visitors all over the house. i bade them search--search well. i led them, at length, to his chamber. i showed them his treasures, secure, undisturbed. in the enthusiasm of my confidence, i brought chairs into the room, and desired them here to rest from their fatigues, while i myself, in the wild audacity of my perfect triumph, placed my own seat upon the very spot beneath which reposed the corpse of the victim.the officers were satisfied. my manner had convinced them. i was singularly at ease. they sat, and while i answered cheerily, they chatted familiar things. but, ere long, i felt myself getting pale and wished them gone. my head ached, and i fancied a ringing in my ears: but still they sat and still chatted. the ringing became more distinct:--it continued and became more distinct: i talked more freely to get rid of the feeling: but it continued and gained definiteness--until, at length, i found that the noise was not within my ears.no doubt i now grew very pale,--but i talked more fluently, and with a heightened voice. yet the sound increased--and what could i do? it was a low, dull, quick sound--much such a sound as a watch makes when enveloped in cotton. i gasped for breath--and yet the officers heard it not. i talked more quickly--more vehemently; but the noise steadily increased. why would they not be gone? i paced the floor to and fro with heavy strides, as if excited to fury by the observation of the men--but the noise steadily increased. oh, god; what could i do? i foamed--i raved--i swore! i swung the chair upon which i had been sitting, and grated it upon the boards, but the noise arose over all and continually increased. it grew louder--louder --louder! and still the men chatted pleasantly, and smiled. was it possible they heard not? almighty god!--no, no! they heard!--they suspected--they knew!--they were making a mockery of my horror!--this i thought, and this i think. but anything was better than this agony! anything was more tolerable than this derision! i could bear those hypocritical smiles no longer! i felt that i must scream or die!--and now--again!--hark! louder! louder! louder!"villains!" i shrieked, "dissemble no more! i admit the deed!--tear up the planks!--here, here!--it is the beating of his hideous heart!"truth is stranger than fiction.old saying.having had occasion, lately, in the course of some oriental investigations, to consult the tellmenow isitsoornot, a work which (like the zohar of simeon jochaides) is scarcely known at all, even in europe; and which has never been quoted, to my knowledge, by any american -- if we except, perhaps, the author of the "curiosities of american literature"; -- having had occasion, i say, to turn over some pages of the first -- mentioned very remarkable work, i was not a little astonished to discover that the literary world has hitherto been strangely in error respecting the fate of the vizier's daughter, scheherazade, as that fate is depicted in the "arabian nights"; and that the denouncement there given, if not altogether inaccurate, as far as it goes, is at least to blame in not having gone very much farther.for full information on this interesting topic, i must refer the inquisitive reader to the "isitsoornot" itself, but in the meantime, i shall be pardoned for giving a summary of what i there discovered.it will be remembered, that, in the usual version of the tales, a certain monarch having good cause to be jealous of his queen, not only puts her to death, but makes a vow, by his beard and the prophet, to espouse each night the most beautiful maiden in his dominions, and the next morning to deliver her up to the executioner.having fulfilled this vow for many years to the letter, and with a religious punctuality and method that conferred great credit upon him as a man of devout feeling and excellent sense, he was interrupted one afternoon (no doubt at his prayers) by a visit from his grand vizier, to whose daughter, it appears, there had occurred an idea.her name was scheherazade, and her idea was, that she would either redeem the land from the depopulating tax upon its beauty, or perish, after the approved fashion of all heroines, in the attempt.accordingly, and although we do not find it to be leap-year (which makes the sacrifice more meritorious), she deputes her father, the grand vizier, to make an offer to the king of her hand. this hand the king eagerly accepts -- (he had intended to take it at all events, and had put off the matter from day to day, only through fear of the vizier), -- but, in accepting it now, he gives all parties very distinctly to understand, that, grand vizier or no grand vizier, he has not the slightest design of giving up one iota of his vow or of his privileges. when, therefore, the fair scheherazade insisted upon marrying the king, and did actually marry him despite her father's excellent advice not to do any thing of the kind -- when she would and did marry him, i say, will i, nill i, it was with her beautiful black eyes as thoroughly open as the nature of the case would allow.it seems, however, that this politic damsel (who had been reading machiavelli, beyond doubt), had a very ingenious little plot in her mind. on the night of the wedding, she contrived, upon i forget what specious pretence, to have her sister occupy a couch sufficiently near that of the royal pair to admit of easy conversation from bed to bed; and, a little before cock-crowing, she took care to awaken the good monarch, her husband (who bore her none the worse will because he intended to wring her neck on the morrow), -- she managed to awaken him, i say, (although on account of a capital conscience and an easy digestion, he slept well) by the profound interest of a story (about a rat and a black cat, i think) which she was narrating (all in an undertone, of course) to her sister. when the day broke, it so happened that this history was not altogether finished, and that scheherazade, in the nature of things could not finish it just then, since it was high time for her to get up and be bowstrung -- a thing very little more pleasant than hanging, only a trifle more genteel.the king's curiosity, however, prevailing, i am sorry to say, even over his sound religious principles, induced him for this once to postpone the fulfilment of his vow until next morning, for the purpose and with the hope of hearing that night how it fared in the end with the black cat (a black cat, i think it was) and the rat.the night having arrived, however, the lady scheherazade not only put the finishing stroke to the black cat and the rat (the rat was blue) but before she well knew what she was about, found herself deep in the intricacies of a narration, having reference (if i am not altogether mistaken) to a pink horse (with green wings) that went, in a violent manner, by clockwork, and was wound up with an indigo key. with this history the king was even more profoundly interested than with the other -- and, as the day broke before its conclusion (notwithstanding all the queen's endeavors to get through with it in time for the bowstringing), there was again no resource but to postpone that ceremony as before, for twenty-four hours. the next night there happened a similar accident with a similar result; and then the next -- and then again the next; so that, in the end, the good monarch, having been unavoidably deprived of all opportunity to keep his vow during a period of no less than one thousand and one nights, either forgets it altogether by the expiration of this time, or gets himself absolved of it in the regular way, or (what is more probable) breaks it outright, as well as the head of his father confessor. at all events, scheherazade, who, being lineally descended from eve, fell heir, perhaps, to the whole seven baskets of talk, which the latter lady, we all know, picked up from under the trees in the garden of eden-scheherazade, i say, finally triumphed, and the tariff upon beauty was repealed.now, this conclusion (which is that of the story as we have it upon record) is, no doubt, excessively proper and pleasant -- but alas! like a great many pleasant things, is more pleasant than true, and i am indebted altogether to the "isitsoornot" for the means of correcting the error. "le mieux," says a french proverb, "est l'ennemi du bien," and, in mentioning that scheherazade had inherited the seven baskets of talk, i should have added that she put them out at compound interest until they amounted to seventy-seven."my dear sister," said she, on the thousand-and-second night, (i quote the language of the "isitsoornot" at this point, verbatim) "my dear sister," said she, "now that all this little difficulty about the bowstring has blown over, and that this odious tax is so happily repealed, i feel that i have been guilty of great indiscretion in withholding from you and the king (who i am sorry to say, snores -- a thing no gentleman would do) the full conclusion of sinbad the sailor. this person went through numerous other and more interesting adventures than those which i related; but the truth is, i felt sleepy on the particular night of their narration, and so was seduced into cutting them short -- a grievous piece of misconduct, for which i only trust that allah will forgive me. but even yet it is not too late to remedy my great neglect -- and as soon as i have given the king a pinch or two in order to wake him up so far that he may stop making that horrible noise, i will forthwith entertain you (and him if he pleases) with the sequel of this very remarkable story.hereupon the sister of scheherazade, as i have it from the "isitsoornot," expressed no very particular intensity of gratification; but the king, having been sufficiently pinched, at length ceased snoring, and finally said, "hum!" and then "hoo!" when the queen, understanding these words (which are no doubt arabic) to signify that he was all attention, and would do his best not to snore any more -- the queen, i say, having arranged these matters to her satisfaction, re-entered thus, at once, into the history of sinbad the sailor:"'at length, in my old age, [these are the words of sinbad himself, as retailed by scheherazade] -- 'at length, in my old age, and after enjoying many years of tranquillity at home, i became once more possessed of a desire of visiting foreign countries; and one day, without acquainting any of my family with my design, i packed up some bundles of such merchandise as was most precious and least bulky, and, engaged a porter to carry them, went with him down to the sea-shore, to await the arrival of any chance vessel that might convey me out of the kingdom into some region which i had not as yet explored."'having deposited the packages upon the sands, we sat down beneath some trees, and looked out into the ocean in the hope of perceiving a ship, but during several hours we saw none whatever. at length i fancied that i could hear a singular buzzing or humming sound; and the porter, after listening awhile, declared that he also could distinguish it. presently it grew louder, and then still louder, so that we could have no doubt that the object which caused it was approaching us. at length, on the edge of the horizon, we discovered a black speck, which rapidly increased in size until we made it out to be a vast monster, swimming with a great part of its body above the surface of the sea. it came toward us with inconceivable swiftness, throwing up huge waves of foam around its breast, and illuminating all that part of the sea through which it passed, with a long line of fire that extended far off into the distance."'as the thing drew near we saw it very distinctly. its length was equal to that of three of the loftiest trees that grow, and it was as wide as the great hall of audience in your palace, o most sublime and munificent of the caliphs. its body, which was unlike that of ordinary fishes, was as solid as a rock, and of a jetty blackness throughout all that portion of it which floated above the water, with the exception of a narrow blood-red streak that completely begirdled it. the belly, which floated beneath the surface, and of which we could get only a glimpse now and then as the monster rose and fell with the billows, was entirely covered with metallic scales, of a color like that of the moon in misty weather. the back was flat and nearly white, and from it there extended upwards of six spines, about half the length of the whole body."'the horrible creature had no mouth that we could perceive, but, as if to make up for this deficiency, it was provided with at least four score of eyes, that protruded from their sockets like those of the green dragon-fly, and were arranged all around the body in two rows, one above the other, and parallel to the blood-red streak, which seemed to answer the purpose of an eyebrow. two or three of these dreadful eyes were much larger than the others, and had the appearance of solid gold."'although this beast approached us, as i have before said, with the greatest rapidity, it must have been moved altogether by necromancy- for it had neither fins like a fish nor web-feet like a duck, nor wings like the seashell which is blown along in the manner of a vessel; nor yet did it writhe itself forward as do the eels. its head and its tail were shaped precisely alike, only, not far from the latter, were two small holes that served for nostrils, and through which the monster puffed out its thick breath with prodigious violence, and with a shrieking, disagreeable noise."'our terror at beholding this hideous thing was very great, but it was even surpassed by our astonishment, when upon getting a nearer look, we perceived upon the creature's back a vast number of animals about the size and shape of men, and altogether much resembling them, except that they wore no garments (as men do), being supplied (by nature, no doubt) with an ugly uncomfortable covering, a good deal like cloth, but fitting so tight to the skin, as to render the poor wretches laughably awkward, and put them apparently to severe pain. on the very tips of their heads were certain square-looking boxes, which, at first sight, i thought might have been intended to answer as turbans, but i soon discovered that they were excessively heavy and solid, and i therefore concluded they were contrivances designed, by their great weight, to keep the heads of the animals steady and safe upon their shoulders. around the necks of the creatures were fastened black collars, (badges of servitude, no doubt,) such as we keep on our dogs, only much wider and infinitely stiffer, so that it was quite impossible for these poor victims to move their heads in any direction without moving the body at the same time; and thus they were doomed to perpetual contemplation of their noses -- a view puggish and snubby in a wonderful, if not positively in an awful degree."'when the monster had nearly reached the shore where we stood, it suddenly pushed out one of its eyes to a great extent, and emitted from it a terrible flash of fire, accompanied by a dense cloud of smoke, and a noise that i can compare to nothing but thunder. as the smoke cleared away, we saw one of the odd man-animals standing near the head of the large beast with a trumpet in his hand, through which (putting it to his mouth) he presently addressed us in loud, harsh, and disagreeable accents, that, perhaps, we should have mistaken for language, had they not come altogether through the nose."'being thus evidently spoken to, i was at a loss how to reply, as i could in no manner understand what was said; and in this difficulty i turned to the porter, who was near swooning through affright, and demanded of him his opinion as to what species of monster it was, what it wanted, and what kind of creatures those were that so swarmed upon its back. to this the porter replied, as well as he could for trepidation, that he had once before heard of this sea-beast; that it was a cruel demon, with bowels of sulphur and blood of fire, created by evil genii as the means of inflicting misery upon mankind; that the things upon its back were vermin, such as sometimes infest cats and dogs, only a little larger and more savage; and that these vermin had their uses, however evil -- for, through the torture they caused the beast by their nibbling and stingings, it was goaded into that degree of wrath which was requisite to make it roar and commit ill, and so fulfil the vengeful and malicious designs of the wicked genii."this account determined me to take to my heels, and, without once even looking behind me, i ran at full speed up into the hills, while the porter ran equally fast, although nearly in an opposite direction, so that, by these means, he finally made his escape with my bundles, of which i have no doubt he took excellent care -- although this is a point i cannot determine, as i do not remember that i ever beheld him again."'for myself, i was so hotly pursued by a swarm of the men-vermin (who had come to the shore in boats) that i was very soon overtaken, bound hand and foot, and conveyed to the beast, which immediately swam out again into the middle of the sea."'i now bitterly repented my folly in quitting a comfortable home to peril my life in such adventures as this; but regret being useless, i made the best of my condition, and exerted myself to secure the goodwill of the man-animal that owned the trumpet, and who appeared to exercise authority over his fellows. i succeeded so well in this endeavor that, in a few days, the creature bestowed upon me various tokens of his favor, and in the end even went to the trouble of teaching me the rudiments of what it was vain enough to denominate its language; so that, at length, i was enabled to converse with it readily, and came to make it comprehend the ardent desire i had of seeing the world."'washish squashish squeak, sinbad, hey-diddle diddle, grunt unt grumble, hiss, fiss, whiss,' said he to me, one day after dinner- but i beg a thousand pardons, i had forgotten that your majesty is not conversant with the dialect of the cock-neighs (so the man-animals were called; i presume because their language formed the connecting link between that of the horse and that of the rooster). with your permission, i will translate. 'washish squashish,' and so forth: -- that is to say, 'i am happy to find, my dear sinbad, that you are really a very excellent fellow; we are now about doing a thing which is called circumnavigating the globe; and since you are so desirous of seeing the world, i will strain a point and give you a free passage upon back of the beast.'"when the lady scheherazade had proceeded thus far, relates the "isitsoornot," the king turned over from his left side to his right, and said:"it is, in fact, very surprising, my dear queen, that you omitted, hitherto, these latter adventures of sinbad. do you know i think them exceedingly entertaining and strange?"the king having thus expressed himself, we are told, the fair scheherazade resumed her history in the following words:"sinbad went on in this manner with his narrative to the caliph- 'i thanked the man-animal for its kindness, and soon found myself very much at home on the beast, which swam at a prodigious rate through the ocean; although the surface of the latter is, in that part of the world, by no means flat, but round like a pomegranate, so that we went -- so to say -- either up hill or down hill all the time.'"that i think, was very singular," interrupted the king."nevertheless, it is quite true," replied scheherazade."i have my doubts," rejoined the king; "but, pray, be so good as to go on with the story.""i will," said the queen. "'the beast,' continued sinbad to the caliph, 'swam, as i have related, up hill and down hill until, at length, we arrived at an island, many hundreds of miles in circumference, but which, nevertheless, had been built in the middle of the sea by a colony of little things like caterpillars'""hum!" said the king."'leaving this island,' said sinbad -- (for scheherazade, it must be understood, took no notice of her husband's ill-mannered ejaculation) 'leaving this island, we came to another where the forests were of solid stone, and so hard that they shivered to pieces the finest-tempered axes with which we endeavoured to cut them down."'"hum!" said the king, again; but scheherazade, paying him no attention, continued in the language of sinbad."'passing beyond this last island, we reached a country where there was a cave that ran to the distance of thirty or forty miles within the bowels of the earth, and that contained a greater number of far more spacious and more magnificent palaces than are to be found in all damascus and bagdad. from the roofs of these palaces there hung myriads of gems, liked diamonds, but larger than men; and in among the streets of towers and pyramids and temples, there flowed immense rivers as black as ebony, and swarming with fish that had no eyes.'""hum!" said the king. "'we then swam into a region of the sea where we found a lofty mountain, down whose sides there streamed torrents of melted metal, some of which were twelve miles wide and sixty miles long ; while from an abyss on the summit, issued so vast a quantity of ashes that the sun was entirely blotted out from the heavens, and it became darker than the darkest midnight; so that when we were even at the distance of a hundred and fifty miles from the mountain, it was impossible to see the whitest object, however close we held it to our eyes.'""hum!" said the king."'after quitting this coast, the beast continued his voyage until we met with a land in which the nature of things seemed reversed -- for we here saw a great lake, at the bottom of which, more than a hundred feet beneath the surface of the water, there flourished in full leaf a forest of tall and luxuriant trees.'""hoo!" said the king."some hundred miles farther on brought us to a climate where the atmosphere was so dense as to sustain iron or steel, just as our own does feather.'""fiddle de dee," said the king."proceeding still in the same direction, we presently arrived at the most magnificent region in the whole world. through it there meandered a glorious river for several thousands of miles. this river was of unspeakable depth, and of a transparency richer than that of amber. it was from three to six miles in width; and its banks which arose on either side to twelve hundred feet in perpendicular height, were crowned with ever-blossoming trees and perpetual sweet-scented flowers, that made the whole territory one gorgeous garden; but the name of this luxuriant land was the kingdom of horror, and to enter it was inevitable death'""humph!" said the king."'we left this kingdom in great haste, and, after some days, came to another, where we were astonished to perceive myriads of monstrous animals with horns resembling scythes upon their heads. these hideous beasts dig for themselves vast caverns in the soil, of a funnel shape, and line the sides of them with, rocks, so disposed one upon the other that they fall instantly, when trodden upon by other animals, thus precipitating them into the monster's dens, where their blood is immediately sucked, and their carcasses afterwards hurled contemptuously out to an immense distance from "the caverns of death."'""pooh!" said the king."'continuing our progress, we perceived a district with vegetables that grew not upon any soil but in the air. there were others that sprang from the substance of other vegetables; others that derived their substance from the bodies of living animals; and then again, there were others that glowed all over with intense fire; others that moved from place to place at pleasure, and what was still more wonderful, we discovered flowers that lived and breathed and moved their limbs at will and had, moreover, the detestable passion of mankind for enslaving other creatures, and confining them in horrid and solitary prisons until the fulfillment of appointed tasks.'""pshaw!" said the king."'quitting this land, we soon arrived at another in which the bees and the birds are mathematicians of such genius and erudition, that they give daily instructions in the science of geometry to the wise men of the empire. the king of the place having offered a reward for the solution of two very difficult problems, they were solved upon the spot -- the one by the bees, and the other by the birds; but the king keeping their solution a secret, it was only after the most profound researches and labor, and the writing of an infinity of big books, during a long series of years, that the men-mathematicians at length arrived at the identical solutions which had been given upon the spot by the bees and by the birds.'""oh my!" said the king."'we had scarcely lost sight of this empire when we found ourselves close upon another, from whose shores there flew over our heads a flock of fowls a mile in breadth, and two hundred and forty miles long; so that, although they flew a mile during every minute, it required no less than four hours for the whole flock to pass over us -- in which there were several millions of millions of fowl.'""oh fy!" said the king."'no sooner had we got rid of these birds, which occasioned us great annoyance, than we were terrified by the appearance of a fowl of another kind, and infinitely larger than even the rocs which i met in my former voyages; for it was bigger than the biggest of the domes on your seraglio, oh, most munificent of caliphs. this terrible fowl had no head that we could perceive, but was fashioned entirely of belly, which was of a prodigious fatness and roundness, of a soft-looking substance, smooth, shining and striped with various colors. in its talons, the monster was bearing away to his eyrie in the heavens, a house from which it had knocked off the roof, and in the interior of which we distinctly saw human beings, who, beyond doubt, were in a state of frightful despair at the horrible fate which awaited them. we shouted with all our might, in the hope of frightening the bird into letting go of its prey, but it merely gave a snort or puff, as if of rage and then let fall upon our heads a heavy sack which proved to be filled with sand!'""stuff!" said the king."'it was just after this adventure that we encountered a continent of immense extent and prodigious solidity, but which, nevertheless, was supported entirely upon the back of a sky-blue cow that had no fewer than four hundred horns.'""that, now, i believe," said the king, "because i have read something of the kind before, in a book.""'we passed immediately beneath this continent, (swimming in between the legs of the cow, and, after some hours, found ourselves in a wonderful country indeed, which, i was informed by the man-animal, was his own native land, inhabited by things of his own species. this elevated the man-animal very much in my esteem, and in fact, i now began to feel ashamed of the contemptuous familiarity with which i had treated him; for i found that the man-animals in general were a nation of the most powerful magicians, who lived with worms in their brain, which, no doubt, served to stimulate them by their painful writhings and wrigglings to the most miraculous efforts of imagination!'""nonsense!" said the king."'among the magicians, were domesticated several animals of very singular kinds; for example, there was a huge horse whose bones were iron and whose blood was boiling water. in place of corn, he had black stones for his usual food; and yet, in spite of so hard a diet, he was so strong and swift that he would drag a load more weighty than the grandest temple in this city, at a rate surpassing that of the flight of most birds.'""twattle!" said the king."'i saw, also, among these people a hen without feathers, but bigger than a camel; instead of flesh and bone she had iron and brick; her blood, like that of the horse, (to whom, in fact, she was nearly related,) was boiling water; and like him she ate nothing but wood or black stones. this hen brought forth very frequently, a hundred chickens in the day; and, after birth, they took up their residence for several weeks within the stomach of their mother.'""fa! lal!" said the king."'one of this nation of mighty conjurors created a man out of brass and wood, and leather, and endowed him with such ingenuity that he would have beaten at chess, all the race of mankind with the exception of the great caliph, haroun alraschid. another of these magi constructed (of like material) a creature that put to shame even the genius of him who made it; for so great were its reasoning powers that, in a second, it performed calculations of so vast an extent that they would have required the united labor of fifty thousand fleshy men for a year. (*23} but a still more wonderful conjuror fashioned for himself a mighty thing that was neither man nor beast, but which had brains of lead, intermixed with a black matter like pitch, and fingers that it employed with such incredible speed and dexterity that it would have had no trouble in writing out twenty thousand copies of the koran in an hour, and this with so exquisite a precision, that in all the copies there should not be found one to vary from another by the breadth of the finest hair. this thing was of prodigious strength, so that it erected or overthrew the mightiest empires at a breath; but its powers were exercised equally for evil and for good.'""ridiculous!" said the king."'among this nation of necromancers there was also one who had in his veins the blood of the salamanders; for he made no scruple of sitting down to smoke his chibouc in a red-hot oven until his dinner was thoroughly roasted upon its floor. another had the faculty of converting the common metals into gold, without even looking at them during the process. another had such a delicacy of touch that he made a wire so fine as to be invisible. another had such quickness of perception that he counted all the separate motions of an elastic body, while it was springing backward and forward at the rate of nine hundred millions of times in a second.'""absurd!" said the king."'another of these magicians, by means of a fluid that nobody ever yet saw, could make the corpses of his friends brandish their arms, kick out their legs, fight, or even get up and dance at his will. another had cultivated his voice to so great an extent that he could have made himself heard from one end of the world to the other. another had so long an arm that he could sit down in damascus and indite a letter at bagdad -- or indeed at any distance whatsoever. another commanded the lightning to come down to him out of the heavens, and it came at his call; and served him for a plaything when it came. another took two loud sounds and out of them made a silence. another constructed a deep darkness out of two brilliant lights. another made ice in a red-hot furnace. another directed the sun to paint his portrait, and the sun did. another took this luminary with the moon and the planets, and having first weighed them with scrupulous accuracy, probed into their depths and found out the solidity of the substance of which they were made. but the whole nation is, indeed, of so surprising a necromantic ability, that not even their infants, nor their commonest cats and dogs have any difficulty in seeing objects that do not exist at all, or that for twenty millions of years before the birth of the nation itself had been blotted out from the face of creation."'analogous experiments in respect to sound produce analogous results."preposterous!" said the king."'the wives and daughters of these incomparably great and wise magi,'" continued scheherazade, without being in any manner disturbed by these frequent and most ungentlemanly interruptions on the part of her husband -- "'the wives and daughters of these eminent conjurers are every thing that is accomplished and refined; and would be every thing that is interesting and beautiful, but for an unhappy fatality that besets them, and from which not even the miraculous powers of their husbands and fathers has, hitherto, been adequate to save. some fatalities come in certain shapes, and some in others -- but this of which i speak has come in the shape of a crotchet.'""a what?" said the king."'a crotchet'" said scheherazade. "'one of the evil genii, who are perpetually upon the watch to inflict ill, has put it into the heads of these accomplished ladies that the thing which we describe as personal beauty consists altogether in the protuberance of the region which lies not very far below the small of the back. perfection of loveliness, they say, is in the direct ratio of the extent of this lump. having been long possessed of this idea, and bolsters being cheap in that country, the days have long gone by since it was possible to distinguish a woman from a dromedary-'""stop!" said the king -- "i can't stand that, and i won't. you have already given me a dreadful headache with your lies. the day, too, i perceive, is beginning to break. how long have we been married? -- my conscience is getting to be troublesome again. and then that dromedary touch -- do you take me for a fool? upon the whole, you might as well get up and be throttled."these words, as i learn from the "isitsoornot," both grieved and astonished scheherazade; but, as she knew the king to be a man of scrupulous integrity, and quite unlikely to forfeit his word, she submitted to her fate with a good grace. she derived, however, great consolation, (during the tightening of the bowstring,) from the reflection that much of the history remained still untold, and that the petulance of her brute of a husband had reaped for him a most righteous reward, in depriving him of many inconceivable adventures.after the very minute and elaborate paper by arago, to say nothing of the summary in 'silliman's journal,' with the detailed statement just published by lieutenant maury, it will not be supposed, of course, that in offering a few hurried remarks in reference to von kempelen's discovery, i have any design to look at the subject in a scientific point of view. my object is simply, in the first place, to say a few words of von kempelen himself (with whom, some years ago, i had the honor of a slight personal acquaintance), since every thing which concerns him must necessarily, at this moment, be of interest; and, in the second place, to look in a general way, and speculatively, at the results of the discovery.it may be as well, however, to premise the cursory observations which i have to offer, by denying, very decidedly, what seems to be a general impression (gleaned, as usual in a case of this kind, from the newspapers), viz.: that this discovery, astounding as it unquestionably is, is unanticipated.by reference to the 'diary of sir humphrey davy' (cottle and munroe, london, pp. 150), it will be seen at pp. 53 and 82, that this illustrious chemist had not only conceived the idea now in question, but had actually made no inconsiderable progress, experimentally, in the very identical analysis now so triumphantly brought to an issue by von kempelen, who although he makes not the slightest allusion to it, is, without doubt (i say it unhesitatingly, and can prove it, if required), indebted to the 'diary' for at least the first hint of his own undertaking.the paragraph from the 'courier and enquirer,' which is now going the rounds of the press, and which purports to claim the invention for a mr. kissam, of brunswick, maine, appears to me, i confess, a little apocryphal, for several reasons; although there is nothing either impossible or very improbable in the statement made. i need not go into details. my opinion of the paragraph is founded principally upon its manner. it does not look true. persons who are narrating facts, are seldom so particular as mr. kissam seems to be, about day and date and precise location. besides, if mr. kissam actually did come upon the discovery he says he did, at the period designated -- nearly eight years ago -- how happens it that he took no steps, on the instant, to reap the immense benefits which the merest bumpkin must have known would have resulted to him individually, if not to the world at large, from the discovery? it seems to me quite incredible that any man of common understanding could have discovered what mr. kissam says he did, and yet have subsequently acted so like a baby -- so like an owl -- as mr. kissam admits that he did. by-the-way, who is mr. kissam? and is not the whole paragraph in the 'courier and enquirer' a fabrication got up to 'make a talk'? it must be confessed that it has an amazingly moon-hoaxy-air. very little dependence is to be placed upon it, in my humble opinion; and if i were not well aware, from experience, how very easily men of science are mystified, on points out of their usual range of inquiry, i should be profoundly astonished at finding so eminent a chemist as professor draper, discussing mr. kissam's (or is it mr. quizzem's?) pretensions to the discovery, in so serious a tone.but to return to the 'diary' of sir humphrey davy. this pamphlet was not designed for the public eye, even upon the decease of the writer, as any person at all conversant with authorship may satisfy himself at once by the slightest inspection of the style. at page 13, for example, near the middle, we read, in reference to his researches about the protoxide of azote: 'in less than half a minute the respiration being continued, diminished gradually and were succeeded by analogous to gentle pressure on all the muscles.' that the respiration was not 'diminished,' is not only clear by the subsequent context, but by the use of the plural, 'were.' the sentence, no doubt, was thus intended: 'in less than half a minute, the respiration [being continued, these feelings] diminished gradually, and were succeeded by [a sensation] analogous to gentle pressure on all the muscles.' a hundred similar instances go to show that the ms. so inconsiderately published, was merely a rough note-book, meant only for the writer's own eye, but an inspection of the pamphlet will convince almost any thinking person of the truth of my suggestion. the fact is, sir humphrey davy was about the last man in the world to commit himself on scientific topics. not only had he a more than ordinary dislike to quackery, but he was morbidly afraid of appearing empirical; so that, however fully he might have been convinced that he was on the right track in the matter now in question, he would never have spoken out, until he had every thing ready for the most practical demonstration. i verily believe that his last moments would have been rendered wretched, could he have suspected that his wishes in regard to burning this 'diary' (full of crude speculations) would have been unattended to; as, it seems, they were. i say 'his wishes,' for that he meant to include this note-book among the miscellaneous papers directed 'to be burnt,' i think there can be no manner of doubt. whether it escaped the flames by good fortune or by bad, yet remains to be seen. that the passages quoted above, with the other similar ones referred to, gave von kempelen the hint, i do not in the slightest degree question; but i repeat, it yet remains to be seen whether this momentous discovery itself (momentous under any circumstances) will be of service or disservice to mankind at large. that von kempelen and his immediate friends will reap a rich harvest, it would be folly to doubt for a moment. they will scarcely be so weak as not to 'realize,' in time, by large purchases of houses and land, with other property of intrinsic value.in the brief account of von kempelen which appeared in the 'home journal,' and has since been extensively copied, several misapprehensions of the german original seem to have been made by the translator, who professes to have taken the passage from a late number of the presburg 'schnellpost.' 'viele' has evidently been misconceived (as it often is), and what the translator renders by 'sorrows,' is probably 'lieden,' which, in its true version, 'sufferings,' would give a totally different complexion to the whole account; but, of course, much of this is merely guess, on my part.von kempelen, however, is by no means 'a misanthrope,' in appearance, at least, whatever he may be in fact. my acquaintance with him was casual altogether; and i am scarcely warranted in saying that i know him at all; but to have seen and conversed with a man of so prodigious a notoriety as he has attained, or will attain in a few days, is not a small matter, as times go.'the literary world' speaks of him, confidently, as a native of presburg (misled, perhaps, by the account in 'the home journal') but i am pleased in being able to state positively, since i have it from his own lips, that he was born in utica, in the state of new york, although both his parents, i believe, are of presburg descent. the family is connected, in some way, with maelzel, of automaton-chess-player memory. in person, he is short and stout, with large, fat, blue eyes, sandy hair and whiskers, a wide but pleasing mouth, fine teeth, and i think a roman nose. there is some defect in one of his feet. his address is frank, and his whole manner noticeable for bonhomie. altogether, he looks, speaks, and acts as little like 'a misanthrope' as any man i ever saw. we were fellow-sojouners for a week about six years ago, at earl's hotel, in providence, rhode island; and i presume that i conversed with him, at various times, for some three or four hours altogether. his principal topics were those of the day, and nothing that fell from him led me to suspect his scientific attainments. he left the hotel before me, intending to go to new york, and thence to bremen; it was in the latter city that his great discovery was first made public; or, rather, it was there that he was first suspected of having made it. this is about all that i personally know of the now immortal von kempelen; but i have thought that even these few details would have interest for the public.there can be little question that most of the marvellous rumors afloat about this affair are pure inventions, entitled to about as much credit as the story of aladdin's lamp; and yet, in a case of this kind, as in the case of the discoveries in california, it is clear that the truth may be stranger than fiction. the following anecdote, at least, is so well authenticated, that we may receive it implicitly.von kempelen had never been even tolerably well off during his residence at bremen; and often, it was well known, he had been put to extreme shifts in order to raise trifling sums. when the great excitement occurred about the forgery on the house of gutsmuth & co., suspicion was directed toward von kempelen, on account of his having purchased a considerable property in gasperitch lane, and his refusing, when questioned, to explain how he became possessed of the purchase money. he was at length arrested, but nothing decisive appearing against him, was in the end set at liberty. the police, however, kept a strict watch upon his movements, and thus discovered that he left home frequently, taking always the same road, and invariably giving his watchers the slip in the neighborhood of that labyrinth of narrow and crooked passages known by the flash name of the 'dondergat.' finally, by dint of great perseverance, they traced him to a garret in an old house of seven stories, in an alley called flatzplatz, -- and, coming upon him suddenly, found him, as they imagined, in the midst of his counterfeiting operations. his agitation is represented as so excessive that the officers had not the slightest doubt of his guilt. after hand-cuffing him, they searched his room, or rather rooms, for it appears he occupied all the mansarde.opening into the garret where they caught him, was a closet, ten feet by eight, fitted up with some chemical apparatus, of which the object has not yet been ascertained. in one corner of the closet was a very small furnace, with a glowing fire in it, and on the fire a kind of duplicate crucible -- two crucibles connected by a tube. one of these crucibles was nearly full of lead in a state of fusion, but not reaching up to the aperture of the tube, which was close to the brim. the other crucible had some liquid in it, which, as the officers entered, seemed to be furiously dissipating in vapor. they relate that, on finding himself taken, kempelen seized the crucibles with both hands (which were encased in gloves that afterwards turned out to be asbestic), and threw the contents on the tiled floor. it was now that they hand-cuffed him; and before proceeding to ransack the premises they searched his person, but nothing unusual was found about him, excepting a paper parcel, in his coat-pocket, containing what was afterward ascertained to be a mixture of antimony and some unknown substance, in nearly, but not quite, equal proportions. all attempts at analyzing the unknown substance have, so far, failed, but that it will ultimately be analyzed, is not to be doubted.passing out of the closet with their prisoner, the officers went through a sort of ante-chamber, in which nothing material was found, to the chemist's sleeping-room. they here rummaged some drawers and boxes, but discovered only a few papers, of no importance, and some good coin, silver and gold. at length, looking under the bed, they saw a large, common hair trunk, without hinges, hasp, or lock, and with the top lying carelessly across the bottom portion. upon attempting to draw this trunk out from under the bed, they found that, with their united strength (there were three of them, all powerful men), they 'could not stir it one inch.' much astonished at this, one of them crawled under the bed, and looking into the trunk, said:'no wonder we couldn't move it -- why it's full to the brim of old bits of brass!'putting his feet, now, against the wall so as to get a good purchase, and pushing with all his force, while his companions pulled with an theirs, the trunk, with much difficulty, was slid out from under the bed, and its contents examined. the supposed brass with which it was filled was all in small, smooth pieces, varying from the size of a pea to that of a dollar; but the pieces were irregular in shape, although more or less flat-looking, upon the whole, 'very much as lead looks when thrown upon the ground in a molten state, and there suffered to grow cool.' now, not one of these officers for a moment suspected this metal to be any thing but brass. the idea of its being gold never entered their brains, of course; how could such a wild fancy have entered it? and their astonishment may be well conceived, when the next day it became known, all over bremen, that the 'lot of brass' which they had carted so contemptuously to the police office, without putting themselves to the trouble of pocketing the smallest scrap, was not only gold -- real gold -- but gold far finer than any employed in coinage-gold, in fact, absolutely pure, virgin, without the slightest appreciable alloy.i need not go over the details of von kempelen's confession (as far as it went) and release, for these are familiar to the public. that he has actually realized, in spirit and in effect, if not to the letter, the old chimaera of the philosopher's stone, no sane person is at liberty to doubt. the opinions of arago are, of course, entitled to the greatest consideration; but he is by no means infallible; and what he says of bismuth, in his report to the academy, must be taken cum grano salis. the simple truth is, that up to this period all analysis has failed; and until von kempelen chooses to let us have the key to his own published enigma, it is more than probable that the matter will remain, for years, in statu quo. all that as yet can fairly be said to be known is, that 'pure gold can be made at will, and very readily from lead in connection with certain other substances, in kind and in proportions, unknown.'speculation, of course, is busy as to the immediate and ultimate results of this discovery -- a discovery which few thinking persons will hesitate in referring to an increased interest in the matter of gold generally, by the late developments in california; and this reflection brings us inevitably to another -- the exceeding inopportuneness of von kempelen's analysis. if many were prevented from adventuring to california, by the mere apprehension that gold would so materially diminish in value, on account of its plentifulness in the mines there, as to render the speculation of going so far in search of it a doubtful one -- what impression will be wrought now, upon the minds of those about to emigrate, and especially upon the minds of those actually in the mineral region, by the announcement of this astounding discovery of von kempelen? a discovery which declares, in so many words, that beyond its intrinsic worth for manufacturing purposes (whatever that worth may be), gold now is, or at least soon will be (for it cannot be supposed that von kempelen can long retain his secret), of no greater value than lead, and of far inferior value to silver. it is, indeed, exceedingly difficult to speculate prospectively upon the consequences of the discovery, but one thing may be positively maintained -- that the announcement of the discovery six months ago would have had material influence in regard to the settlement of california.in europe, as yet, the most noticeable results have been a rise of two hundred per cent. in the price of lead, and nearly twenty-five per cent. that of silver.theodoric voler had been brought up, from infancy to the confines of middle age, by a fond mother whose chief solicitude had been to keep him screened from what she called the coarser realities of life. when she died she left theodoric alone in a world that was as real as ever, and a good deal coarser than he considered it had any need to be. to a man of his temperament and upbringing even a simple railway journey was crammed with petty annoyances and minor discords, and as he settled himself down in a second-class compartment one september morning he was conscious of ruffled feelings and general mental discomposure. he had been staying at a country vicarage, the inmates of which had been certainly neither brutal nor bacchanalian, but their supervision of the domestic establishment had been of that lax order which invites disaster. the pony carriage that was to take him to the station had never been properly ordered, and when the moment for his departure drew near, the handyman who should have produced the required article was nowhere to be found. in this emergency theodoric, to his mute but very intense disgust, found himself obliged to collaborate with the vicar's daughter in the task of harnessing the pony, which necessitated groping about in an ill-lighted outbuilding called a stable, and  melling very like one--except in patches where it smelled of mice. without being actually afraid of mice, theodoric classed them among the coarser incidents of life, and considered that providence, with a little exercise of moral courage, might long ago have recognized that they were not indispensable, and have withdrawn them from circulation. as the train glided out of the station theodoric's nervous imagination accused himself of exhaling a weak odor of stable yard, and possibly of displaying a moldy straw or two on his unusually well-brushed garments. fortunately the only other occupation of the compartment, a lady of about the same age as himself, seemed inclined for slumber rather than scrutiny; the train was not due to stop till the terminus was reached, in about an hour's time, and the carriage was of the oid-fashioned sort that held no communication with a corridor, therefore no further traveling companions were likely to intrude on theodoric's semiprivacy. and yet the train had scarcely attained its normal speed before he became reluctantly but vividly aware that he was not alone with the slumbering lady; he was not even alone in his own clothes. a warm, creeping movement over his flesh betrayed the unwelcome and highly resented presence, unseen but poignant, of a strayed mouse, that had evidently dashed into its present retreat during the episode of the pony harnessing. furtive stamps and shakes and wildly directed pinches failed to dislodge the intruder, whose motto, indeed, seemed to be excelsior; and the lawful occupant of the clothes lay back against the cushions and endeavored rapidly to evolve some means for putting an end to the dual ownership. it was unthinkable that he should continue for the space of a whole hour in the horrible position of a rowton house for vagrant mice already his imagination had at least doubled the numbers of the alien invasion. on the other hand, nothing less drastic than partial disrobing would ease him of his tormentor, and to undress in the presence of a lady, even for so laudable a purpose, was an idea that made his ear tips tingle in a blush of abject shame. he had never heen able to bring himself even to the mild exposure of openwork socks in the presence of the fair sex. and yet--the lady in this case was to all appearances soundly and securely asleep; the mouse, on the other hand, seemed to be trying to crowd a wanderjahr into a few strenuous minutes. if there is any truth in the theory of transmigration, this particular mouse must certainly have been in a former state a member of the alpine club. sometimes in its eagerness it lost its footing and slipped for half an inch or so; and then, in fright, or more probably temper, it bit. theodoric was goaded into the most audacious undertaking of his life. crimsoning to the hue of a beetroot and keeping an agonized watch on his slumbering fellow traveler, he swiftly and noiselessly secured the ends of his railway rug to the racks on either side of the carriage, so that a substantial curtain hung athwart the compartment. in the narrow dressing room that he had thus improvised he proceeded with violent haste to extricate himself partially and the mouse entirely from the surrounding casings of tweed and half-wool. as the unraveled mouse gave a wild leap to the floor, the rug, slipping its fastening at either end, also came down with a heart-curdling flop, and almost simultaneously the awakened sleeper opened her eyes. with a movement almost quicker than the mouse's, theodoric pounced on the rug and hauled its ample folds chin-high over his dismantled person as he collapsed into the farther corner of the carriage. the blood raced and beat in the veins of his neck and forehead, while he waited dumbly for the communication cord to be pulled. the lady, however, contented herself with a silent stare at her strangely muffled companion. how much had she seen, theodoric queried to himself; and in any case what on earth must she think of his present posture?"i think i have caught a chill," he ventured desperately."really, i'm sorry," she replied. "i was just going to ask you if you would open this window.""i fancy it's malaria," he added, his teeth chattering slightly, as much from fright as from a desire to support his theory."i've got some brandy in my holdall, if you'll kindly reach it down for me," said his companion."not for worlds--i mean, i never take anything for it," he assured her earnestly."i suppose you caught it in the tropics?"theodoric, whose acquaintance with the tropics was limited to an annual present of a chest of tea from an uncle in ceylon, felt that even the malaria was slipping from him. would it be possible, he wondered to disclose the real state of affairs to her in small installments?"are you afraid of mice?" he ventured, growing, if possible, more scarlet in the face."not unless they came in quantities. why do you ask?""i had one crawling inside my clothes just now," said theodoric in a voice that hardly seemed his own. "it was a most awkward situation.""it must have been, if you wear your clothes at all tight," she observed. "but mice have strange ideas of comfort.""i had to get rid of it while you were asleep," he continued. then, with a gulp, he added, "it was getting rid of it that brought me to-to this.""surely leaving off one small mouse wouldn't bring on a chill," she exclaimed, with a levity that theodoric accounted abominable.evidently she had detected something of his predicament, and was enjoying his confusion. all the blood in his body seemed to have mobilized in one concentrated blush, and an agony of abasement, worse than a myriad mice, crept up and down over his soul. and then, as reflection began to assert itself, sheer terror took the place of humiliation. with every minute that passed the train was rushing nearer to the crowded and bustling terminus, where dozens of prying eyes would be exchanged for the one paralyzing pair that watched him from the farther corner of the carriage. there was one slender, despairing chance, which the next few minutes must decide. his fellow traveler might relapse into a blessed slumber. but as the minutes throbbed by that chance ebbed away. the furtive glance which theodoric stole at her from time to time disclosed only an unwinking wakefulness."i think we must be getting near now," she presently observed.theodoric had already noted with growing terror the recurring stacks of small, ugly dwellings that heralded the journey's end. the words acted as a signal. like a hunted beast breaking cover and dashing madly toward some other haven of momentary safety he threw aside his rug, and struggled frantically into his disheveled garments. he was conscious of dull suburban stations racing past the window, of a choking, hammering sensation in his throat and heart, and of an icy silence in that corner toward which he dared not look. then as he sank back in his seat, clothed and almost delirious, the train slowed down to a final crawl, and the woman spoke."would you be so kind," she asked, "as to get me a porter to put me into a cab? it's a shame to trouble you when you're feeling unwell, but being blind makes one so helpless at a railway station."it was mrs. packletide's pleasure and intention that she should shoot a tiger. not that the lust to kill had suddenly descended on her, or that she felt that she would leave india safer and more wholesome than she had found it, with one fraction less of wild beast per million of inhabitants. the compelling motive for her sudden deviation towards the footsteps of nimrod was the fact that loona bimberton had recently been carried eleven miles in an aeroplane by an algerian aviator, and talked of nothing else; only a personally procured tiger-skin and a heavy harvest of press photographs could successfully counter that sort of thing. mrs. packletide had already arranged in her mind the lunch she would give at her house in curzon street, ostensibly in loona bimberton's honour, with a tiger-skin rug occupying most of the foreground and all of the conversation. she had also already designed in her mind the tiger-claw broach that she was going to give loona bimberton on her next birthday. in a world that is supposed to be chiefly swayed by hunger and by love mrs. packletide was an exception; her movements and motives were largely governed by dislike of loona bimberton.circumstances proved propitious. mrs. packletide had offered a thousand rupees for the opportunity of shooting a tiger without over-much risk or exertion, and it so happened that a neighbouring village could boast of being the favoured rendezvous of an animal of respectable antecedents, which had been driven by the increasing infirmities of age to abandon game-killing and confine its appetite to the smaller domestic animals. the prospect of earning the thousand rupees had stimulated the sporting and commercial instinct of the villagers; children were posted night and day on the outskirts of the local jungle to head the tiger back in the unlikely event of his attempting to roam away to fresh hunting-grounds, and the cheaper kinds of goats were left about with elaborate carelessness to keep him satisfied with his present quarters. the one great anxiety was lest he should die of old age before the date appointed for the memsahib's shoot. mothers carrying their babies home through the jungle after the day's work in the fields hushed their singing lest they might curtail the restful sleep of the venerable herd-robber.the great night duly arrived, moonlit and cloudless. a platform had been constructed in a comfortable and conveniently placed tree, and thereon crouched mrs. packletide and her paid companion, miss mebbin. a goat, gifted with a particularly persistent bleat, such as even a partially deaf tiger might be reasonably expected to hear on a still night, was tethered at the correct distance. with an accurately sighted rifle and a thumb-nail pack of patience cards the sportswoman awaited the coming of the quarry."i suppose we are in some danger?" said miss mebbin.she was not actually nervous about the wild beast, but she had a morbid dread of performing an atom more service than she had been paid for."nonsense," said mrs. packletide; "it's a very old tiger. it couldn't spring up here even if it wanted to.""if it's an old tiger i think you ought to get it cheaper. a thousand rupees is a lot of money."louisa mebbin adopted a protective elder-sister attitude towards money in general, irrespective of nationality or denomination. her energetic intervention had saved many a rouble from dissipating itself in tips in some moscow hotel, and francs and centimes clung to her instinctively under circumstances which would have driven them headlong from less sympathetic hands. her speculations as to the market depreciation of tiger remnants were cut short by the appearance on the scene of the animal itself. as soon as it caught sight of the tethered goat it lay flat on the earth, seemingly less from a desire to take advantage of all available cover than for the purpose of snatching a short rest before commencing the grand attack."i believe it's ill," said louisa mebbin, loudly in hindustani, for the benefit of the village headman, who was in ambush in a neighbouring tree."hush!" said mrs. packletide, and at that moment the tiger commenced ambling towards his victim."now, now!" urged miss mebbin with some excitement; "if he doesn't touch the goat we needn't pay for it." (the bait was an extra.)the rifle flashed out with a loud report, and the great tawny beast sprang to one side and then rolled over in the stillness of death. in a moment a crowd of excited natives had swarmed on to the scene, and their shouting speedily carried the glad news to the village, where a thumping of tom-toms took up the chorus of triumph. and their triumph and rejoicing found a ready echo in the heart of mrs. packletide; already that luncheon-party in curzon street seemed immeasurably nearer.it was louisa mebbin who drew attention to the fact that the goat was in death-throes from a mortal bullet-wound, while no trace of the rifle's deadly work could be found on the tiger. evidently the wrong animal had been hit, and the beast of prey had succumbed to heart-failure, caused by the sudden report of the rifle, accelerated by senile decay. mrs. packletide was pardonably annoyed at the discovery; but, at any rate, she was the possessor of a dead tiger, and the villagers, anxious for their thousand rupees, gladly connived at the fiction that she had shot the beast. and miss mebbin was a paid companion. therefore did mrs. packletide face the cameras with a light heart, and her pictured fame reached from the pages of the texas weekly snapshot to the illustrated monday supplement of the novoe vremya. as for loona bimberton, she refused to look at an illustrated paper for weeks, and her letter of thanks for the gift of a tiger-claw brooch was a model of repressed emotions. the luncheon-party she declined; there are limits beyond which repressed emotions become dangerous.from curzon street the tiger-skin rug travelled down to the manor house, and was duly inspected and admired by the county, and it seemed a fitting and appropriate thing when mrs. packletide went to the county costume ball in the character of diana. she refused to fall in, however, with clovis's tempting suggestion of a primeval dance party, at which every one should wear the skins of beasts they had recently slain. "i should be in rather a baby bunting condition," confessed clovis, "with a miserable rabbit-skin or two to wrap up in, but then," he added, with a rather malicious glance at diana's proportions, "my figure is quite as good as that russian dancing boy's.""how amused every one would be if they knew what really happened," said louisa mebbin a few days after the ball."what do you mean?" asked mrs. packletide quickly."how you shot the goat and frightened the tiger to death," said miss mebbin, with her disagreeably pleasant laugh."no one would believe it," said mrs. packletide, her face changing colour as rapidly as though it were going through a book of patterns before post-time."loona bimberton would," said miss mebbin. mrs. packletide's face settled on an unbecoming shade of greenish white."you surely wouldn't give me away?" she asked."i've seen a week-end cottage near darking that i should rather like to buy," said miss mebbin with seeming irrelevance. "six hundred and eighty, freehold. quite a bargain, only i don't happen to have the money."*louisa mebbin's pretty week-end cottage, christened by her "les fauves," and gay in summer-time with its garden borders of tiger-lilies, is the wonder and admiration of her friends."it is a marvel how louisa manages to do it," is the general verdict.mrs. packletide indulges in no more big-game shooting."the incidental expenses are so heavy," she confides to inquiring friends."my aunt will be down presently, mr. nuttel," said a very self-possessed young lady of fifteen; "in the meantime you must try and put up with me."framton nuttel endeavored to say the correct something which should duly flatter the niece of the moment without unduly discounting the aunt that was to come. privately he doubted more than ever whether these formal visits on a succession of total strangers would do much towards helping the nerve cure which he was supposed to be undergoing."i know how it will be," his sister had said when he was preparing to migrate to this rural retreat; "you will bury yourself down there and not speak to a living soul, and your nerves will be worse than ever from moping. i shall just give you letters of introduction to all the people i know there. some of them, as far as i can remember, were quite nice."framton wondered whether mrs. sappleton, the lady to whom he was presenting one of the letters of introduction came into the nice division."do you know many of the people round here?" asked the niece, when she judged that they had had sufficient silent communion."hardly a soul," said framton. "my sister was staying here, at the rectory, you know, some four years ago, and she gave me letters of introduction to some of the people here."he made the last statement in a tone of distinct regret."then you know practically nothing about my aunt?" pursued the self-possessed young lady."only her name and address," admitted the caller. he was wondering whether mrs. sappleton was in the married or widowed state. an undefinable something about the room seemed to suggest masculine habitation."her great tragedy happened just three years ago," said the child; "that would be since your sister's time.""her tragedy?" asked framton; somehow in this restful country spot tragedies seemed out of place."you may wonder why we keep that window wide open on an october afternoon," said the niece, indicating a large french window that opened on to a lawn."it is quite warm for the time of the year," said framton; "but has that window got anything to do with the tragedy?""out through that window, three years ago to a day, her husband and her two young brothers went off for their day's shooting. they never came back. in crossing the moor to their favorite snipe-shooting ground they were all three engulfed in a treacherous piece of bog. it had been that dreadful wet summer, you know, and places that were safe in other years gave way suddenly without warning. their bodies were never recovered. that was the dreadful part of it." here the child's voice lost its self-possessed note and became falteringly human. "poor aunt always thinks that they will come back someday, they and the little brown spaniel that was lost with them, and walk in at that window just as they used to do. that is why the window is kept open every evening till it is quite dusk. poor dear aunt, she has often told me how they went out, her husband with his white waterproof coat over his arm, and ronnie, her youngest brother, singing 'bertie, why do you bound?' as he always did to tease her, because she said it got on her nerves. do you know, sometimes on still, quiet evenings like this, i almost get a creepy feeling that they will all walk in through that window--"she broke off with a little shudder. it was a relief to framton when the aunt bustled into the room with a whirl of apologies for being late in making her appearance."i hope vera has been amusing you?" she said."she has been very interesting," said framton."i hope you don't mind the open window," said mrs. sappleton briskly; "my husband and brothers will be home directly from shooting, and they always come in this way. they've been out for snipe in the marshes today, so they'll make a fine mess over my poor carpets. so like you menfolk, isn't it?"she rattled on cheerfully about the shooting and the scarcity of birds, and the prospects for duck in the winter. to framton it was all purely horrible. he made a desperate but only partially successful effort to turn the talk on to a less ghastly topic, he was conscious that his hostess was giving him only a fragment of her attention, and her eyes were constantly straying past him to the open window and the lawn beyond. it was certainly an unfortunate coincidence that he should have paid his visit on this tragic anniversary."the doctors agree in ordering me complete rest, an absence of mental excitement, and avoidance of anything in the nature of violent physical exercise," announced framton, who labored under the tolerably widespread delusion that total strangers and chance acquaintances are hungry for the least detail of one's ailments and infirmities, their cause and cure. "on the matter of diet they are not so much in agreement," he continued."no?" said mrs. sappleton, in a voice which only replaced a yawn at the last moment. then she suddenly brightened into alert attention--but not to what framton was saying."here they are at last!" she cried. "just in time for tea, and don't they look as if they were muddy up to the eyes!"framton shivered slightly and turned towards the niece with a look intended to convey sympathetic comprehension. the child was staring out through the open window with a dazed horror in her eyes. in a chill shock of nameless fear framton swung round in his seat and looked in the same direction.in the deepening twilight three figures were walking across the lawn towards the window, they all carried guns under their arms, and one of them was additionally burdened with a white coat hung over his shoulders. a tired brown spaniel kept close at their heels. noiselessly they neared the house, and then a hoarse young voice chanted out of the dusk: "i said, bertie, why do you bound?"framton grabbed wildly at his stick and hat; the hall door, the gravel drive, and the front gate were dimly noted stages in his headlong retreat. a cyclist coming along the road had to run into the hedge to avoid imminent collision."here we are, my dear," said the bearer of the white mackintosh, coming in through the window, "fairly muddy, but most of it's dry. who was that who bolted out as we came up?""a most extraordinary man, a mr. nuttel," said mrs. sappleton; "could only talk about his illnesses, and dashed off without a word of goodby or apology when you arrived. one would think he had seen a ghost.""i expect it was the spaniel," said the niece calmly; "he told me he had a horror of dogs. he was once hunted into a cemetery somewhere on the banks of the ganges by a pack of pariah dogs, and had to spend the night in a newly dug grave with the creatures snarling and grinning and foaming just above him. enough to make anyone lose their nerve."romance at short notice was her speciality.conradin was ten years old, and the doctor had pronounced his professional opinion that the boy would not live another five years. the doctor was silky and effete, and counted for little, but his opinion was endorsed by mrs. de ropp, who counted for nearly everything. mrs. de ropp was conradin's cousin and guardian, and in his eyes she represented those three-fifths of the world that are necessary and disagreeable and real; the other two-fifths, in perpetual antagonism to the foregoing, were summed up in himself and his imagination. one of these days conradin supposed he would succumb to the mastering pressure of wearisome necessary things--such as illnesses and coddling restrictions and drawn-out dullness. without his imagination, which was rampant under the spur of loneliness, he would have succumbed long ago.mrs. de ropp would never, in her honestest moments, have confessed to herself that she disliked conradin, though she might have been dimly aware that thwarting him "for his good" was a duty which she did not find particularly irksome. conradin hated her with a desperate sincerity which he was perfectly able to mask. such few pleasures as he could contrive for himself gained an added relish from the likelihood that they would be displeasing to his guardian, and from the realm of his imagination she was locked out--an unclean thing, which should find no entrance.in the dull, cheerless garden, overlooked by so many windows that were ready to open with a message not to do this or that, or a reminder that medicines were due, he found little attraction. the few fruit-trees that it contained were set jealously apart from his plucking, as though they were rare specimens of their kind blooming in an arid waste; it would probably have been difficult to find a market-gardener who would have offered ten shillings for their entire yearly produce. in a forgotten corner, however, almost hidden behind a dismal shrubbery, was a disused tool-shed of respectable proportions, and within its walls conradin found a haven, something that took on the varying aspects of a playroom and a cathedral. he had peopled it with a legion of familiar phantoms, evoked partly from fragments of history and partly from his own brain, but it also boasted two inmates of flesh and blood. in one corner lived a ragged-plumaged houdan hen, on which the boy lavished an affection that had scarcely another outlet. further back in the gloom stood a large hutch, divided into two compartments, one of which was fronted with close iron bars. this was the abode of a large polecat-ferret, which a friendly butcher-boy had once smuggled, cage and all, into its present quarters, in exchange for a long-secreted hoard of small silver. conradin was dreadfully afraid of the lithe, sharp-fanged beast, but it was his most treasured possession. its very presence in the tool-shed was a secret and fearful joy, to be kept scrupulously from the knowledge of the woman, as he privately dubbed his cousin. and one day, out of heaven knows what material, he spun the beast a wonderful name, and from that moment it grew into a god and a religion. the woman indulged in religion once a week at a church near by, and took conradin with her, but to him the church service was an alien rite in the house of rimmon. every thursday, in the dim and musty silence of the tool-shed, he worshipped with mystic and elaborate ceremonial before the wooden hutch where dwelt sredni vashtar, the great ferret. red flowers in their season and scarlet berries in the winter-time were offered at his shrine, for he was a god who laid some special stress on the fierce impatient side of things, as opposed to the woman's religion, which, as far as conradin could observe, went to great lengths in the contrary direction. and on great festivals powdered nutmeg was strewn in front of his hutch, an important feature of the offering being that the nutmeg had to be stolen. these festivals were of irregular occurrence, and were chiefly appointed to celebrate some passing event. on one occasion, when mrs. de ropp suffered from acute toothache for three days, conradin kept up the festival during the entire three days, and almost succeeded in persuading himself that sredni vashtar was personally responsible for the toothache. if the malady had lasted for another day the supply of nutmeg would have given out.the houdan hen was never drawn into the cult of sredni vashtar. conradin had long ago settled that she was an anabaptist. he did not pretend to have the remotest knowledge as to what an anabaptist was, but he privately hoped that it was dashing and not very respectable. mrs. de ropp was the ground plan on which he based and detested all respectability.after a while conradin's absorption in the tool-shed began to attract the notice of his guardian. "it is not good for him to be pottering down there in all weathers," she promptly decided, and at breakfast one morning she announced that the houdan hen had been sold and taken away overnight. with her short-sighted eyes she peered at conradin, waiting for an outbreak of rage and sorrow, which she was ready to rebuke with a flow of excellent precepts and reasoning. but conradin said nothing: there was nothing to be said. something perhaps in his white set face gave her a momentary qualm, for at tea that afternoon there was toast on the table, a delicacy which she usually banned on the ground that it was bad for him; also because the making of it "gave trouble," a deadly offence in the middle-class feminine eye."i thought you liked toast," she exclaimed, with an injured air, observing that he did not touch it."sometimes," said conradin.in the shed that evening there was an innovation in the worship of the hutch-god. conradin had been wont to chant his praises, tonight be asked a boon."do one thing for me, sredni vashtar."the thing was not specified. as sredni vashtar was a god he must be supposed to know. and choking back a sob as he looked at that other empty corner, conradin went back to the world he so hated.and every night, in the welcome darkness of his bedroom, and every evening in the dusk of the tool-shed, conradin's bitter litany went up: "do one thing for me, sredni vashtar."mrs. de ropp noticed that the visits to the shed did not cease, and one day she made a further journey of inspection."what are you keeping in that locked hutch?" she asked. "i believe it's guinea-pigs. i'll have them all cleared away."conradin shut his lips tight, but the woman ransacked his bedroom till she found the carefully hidden key, and forthwith marched down to the shed to complete her discovery. it was a cold afternoon, and conradin had been bidden to keep to the house. from the furthest window of the dining-room the door of the shed could just be seen beyond the corner of the shrubbery, and there conradin stationed himself. he saw the woman enter, and then be imagined her opening the door of the sacred hutch and peering down with her short-sighted eyes into the thick straw bed where his god lay hidden. perhaps she would prod at the straw in her clumsy impatience. and conradin fervently breathed his prayer for the last time. but he knew as he prayed that he did not believe. he knew that the woman would come out presently with that pursed smile he loathed so well on her face, and that in an hour or two the gardener would carry away his wonderful god, a god no longer, but a simple brown ferret in a hutch. and he knew that the woman would triumph always as she triumphed now, and that he would grow ever more sickly under her pestering and domineering and superior wisdom, till one day nothing would matter much more with him, and the doctor would be proved right. and in the sting and misery of his defeat, he began to chant loudly and defiantly the hymn of his threatened idol:sredni vashtar went forth,his thoughts were red thoughts and his teeth were white.his enemies called for peace, but he brought them death.sredni vashtar the beautiful.and then of a sudden he stopped his chanting and drew closer to the window-pane. the door of the shed still stood ajar as it had been left, and the minutes were slipping by. they were long minutes, but they slipped by nevertheless. he watched the starlings running and flying in little parties across the lawn; he counted them over and over again, with one eye always on that swinging door. a sour-faced maid came in to lay the table for tea, and still conradin stood and waited and watched. hope had crept by inches into his heart, and now a look of triumph began to blaze in his eyes that had only known the wistful patience of defeat. under his breath, with a furtive exultation, he began once again the pã¦an of victory and devastation. and presently his eyes were rewarded: out through that doorway came a long, low, yellow-and-brown beast, with eyes a-blink at the waning daylight, and dark wet stains around the fur of jaws and throat. conradin dropped on his knees. the great polecat-ferret made its way down to a small brook at the foot of the garden, drank for a moment, then crossed a little plank bridge and was lost to sight in the bushes. such was the passing of sredni vashtar."tea is ready," said the sour-faced maid; "where is the mistress?" "she went down to the shed some time ago," said conradin. and while the maid went to summon her mistress to tea, conradin fished a toasting-fork out of the sideboard drawer and proceeded to toast himself a piece of bread. and during the toasting of it and the buttering of it with much butter and the slow enjoyment of eating it, conradin listened to the noises and silences which fell in quick spasms beyond the dining-room door. the loud foolish screaming of the maid, the answering chorus of wondering ejaculations from the kitchen region, the scuttering footsteps and hurried embassies for outside help, and then, after a lull, the scared sobbings and the shuffling tread of those who bore a heavy burden into the house."whoever will break it to the poor child? i couldn't for the life of me!" exclaimed a shrill voice. and while they debated the matter among themselves, conradin made himself another piece of toast.it was a hot afternoon, and the railway carriage was correspondingly sultry, and the next stop was at templecombe, nearly an hour ahead. the occupants of the carriage were a small girl, and a smaller girl, and a small boy. an aunt belonging to the children occupied one corner seat, and the further corner seat on the opposite side was occupied by a bachelor who was a stranger to their party, but the small girls and the small boy emphatically occupied the compartment. both the aunt and the children were conversational in a limited, persistent way, reminding one of the attentions of a housefly that refuses to be discouraged. most of the aunt's remarks seemed to begin with "don't," and nearly all of the children's remarks began with "why?" the bachelor said nothing out loud. "don't, cyril, don't," exclaimed the aunt, as the small boy began smacking the cushions of the seat, producing a cloud of dust at each blow."come and look out of the window," she added.the child moved reluctantly to the window. "why are those sheep being driven out of that field?" he asked."i expect they are being driven to another field where there is more grass," said the aunt weakly."but there is lots of grass in that field," protested the boy; "there's nothing else but grass there. aunt, there's lots of grass in that field.""perhaps the grass in the other field is better," suggested the aunt fatuously."why is it better?" came the swift, inevitable question."oh, look at those cows!" exclaimed the aunt. nearly every field along the line had contained cows or bullocks, but she spoke as though she were drawing attention to a rarity."why is the grass in the other field better?" persisted cyril.the frown on the bachelor's face was deepening to a scowl. he was a hard, unsympathetic man, the aunt decided in her mind. she was utterly unable to come to any satisfactory decision about the grass in the other field.the smaller girl created a diversion by beginning to recite "on the road to mandalay." she only knew the first line, but she put her limited knowledge to the fullest possible use. she repeated the line over and over again in a dreamy but resolute and very audible voice; it seemed to the bachelor as though some one had had a bet with her that she could not repeat the line aloud two thousand times without stopping. whoever it was who had made the wager was likely to lose his bet."come over here and listen to a story," said the aunt, when the bachelor had looked twice at her and once at the communication cord.the children moved listlessly towards the aunt's end of the carriage. evidently her reputation as a story- teller did not rank high in their estimation.in a low, confidential voice, interrupted at frequent intervals by loud, petulant questionings from her listeners, she began an unenterprising and deplorably uninteresting story about a little girl who was good, and made friends with every one on account of her goodness, and was finally saved from a mad bull by a number of rescuers who admired her moral character."wouldn't they have saved her if she hadn't been good?" demanded the bigger of the small girls. it was exactly the question that the bachelor had wanted to ask."well, yes," admitted the aunt lamely, "but i don't think they would have run quite so fast to her help if they had not liked her so much.""it's the stupidest story i've ever heard," said the bigger of the small girls, with immense conviction."i didn't listen after the first bit, it was so stupid," said cyril.the smaller girl made no actual comment on the story, but she had long ago recommenced a murmured repetition of her favourite line."you don't seem to be a success as a story-teller," said the bachelor suddenly from his corner.the aunt bristled in instant defence at this unexpected attack."it's a very difficult thing to tell stories that children can both understand and appreciate," she said stiffly."i don't agree with you," said the bachelor."perhaps you would like to tell them a story," was the aunt's retort."tell us a story," demanded the bigger of the small girls."once upon a time," began the bachelor, "there was a little girl called bertha, who was extra-ordinarily good."the children's momentarily-aroused interest began at once to flicker; all stories seemed dreadfully alike, no matter who told them."she did all that she was told, she was always truthful, she kept her clothes clean, ate milk puddings as though they were jam tarts, learned her lessons perfectly, and was polite in her manners.""was she pretty?" asked the bigger of the small girls."not as pretty as any of you," said the bachelor, "but she was horribly good."there was a wave of reaction in favour of the story; the word horrible in connection with goodness was a novelty that commended itself. it seemed to introduce a ring of truth that was absent from the aunt's tales of infant life."she was so good," continued the bachelor, "that she won several medals for goodness, which she always wore, pinned on to her dress. there was a medal for obedience, another medal for punctuality, and a third for good behaviour. they were large metal medals and they clicked against one another as she walked. no other child in the town where she lived had as many as three medals, so everybody knew that she must be an extra good child.""horribly good," quoted cyril."everybody talked about her goodness, and the prince of the country got to hear about it, and he said that as she was so very good she might be allowed once a week to walk in his park, which was just outside the town. it was a beautiful park, and no children were ever allowed in it, so it was a great honour for bertha to be allowed to go there.""were there any sheep in the park?" demanded cyril."no;" said the bachelor, "there were no sheep.""why weren't there any sheep?" came the inevitable question arising out of that answer.the aunt permitted herself a smile, which might almost have been described as a grin."there were no sheep in the park," said the bachelor, "because the prince's mother had once had a dream that her son would either be killed by a sheep or else by a clock falling on him. for that reason the prince never kept a sheep in his park or a clock in his palace."the aunt suppressed a gasp of admiration."was the prince killed by a sheep or by a clock?" asked cyril."he is still alive, so we can't tell whether the dream will come true," said the bachelor unconcernedly; "anyway, there were no sheep in the park, but there were lots of little pigs running all over the place.""what colour were they?""black with white faces, white with black spots, black all over, grey with white patches, and some were white all over."the storyteller paused to let a full idea of the park's treasures sink into the children's imaginations; then he resumed:"bertha was rather sorry to find that there were no flowers in the park. she had promised her aunts, with tears in her eyes, that she would not pick any of the kind prince's flowers, and she had meant to keep her promise, so of course it made her feel silly to find that there were no flowers to pick.""why weren't there any flowers?""because the pigs had eaten them all," said the bachelor promptly. "the gardeners had told the prince that you couldn't have pigs and flowers, so he decided to have pigs and no flowers."there was a murmur of approval at the excellence of the prince's decision; so many people would have decided the other way."there were lots of other delightful things in the park. there were ponds with gold and blue and green fish in them, and trees with beautiful parrots that said clever things at a moment's notice, and humming birds that hummed all the popular tunes of the day. bertha walked up and down and enjoyed herself immensely, and thought to herself: 'if i were not so extraordinarily good i should not have been allowed to come into this beautiful park and enjoy all that there is to be seen in it,' and her three medals clinked against one another as she walked and helped to remind her how very good she really was. just then an enormous wolf came prowling into the park to see if it could catch a fat little pig for its supper.""what colour was it?" asked the children, amid an immediate quickening of interest."mud-colour all over, with a black tongue and pale grey eyes that gleamed with unspeakable ferocity. the first thing that it saw in the park was bertha; her pinafore was so spotlessly white and clean that it could be seen from a great distance. bertha saw the wolf and saw that it was stealing towards her, and she began to wish that she had never been allowed to come into the park. she ran as hard as she could, and the wolf came after her with huge leaps and bounds. she managed to reach a shrubbery of myrtle bushes and she hid herself in one of the thickest of the bushes. the wolf came sniffing among the branches, its black tongue lolling out of its mouth and its pale grey eyes glaring with rage. bertha was terribly frightened, and thought to herself: 'if i had not been so extraordinarily good i should have been safe in the town at this moment.' however, the scent of the myrtle was so strong that the wolf could not sniff out where bertha was hiding, and the bushes were so thick that he might have hunted about in them for a long time without catching sight of her, so he thought he might as well go off and catch a little pig instead. bertha was trembling very much at having the wolf prowling and sniffing so near her, and as she trembled the medal for obedience clinked against the medals for good conduct and punctuality. the wolf was just moving away when he heard the sound of the medals clinking and stopped to listen; they clinked again in a bush quite near him. he dashed into the bush, his pale grey eyes gleaming with ferocity and triumph, and dragged bertha out and devoured her to the last morsel. all that was left of her were her shoes, bits of clothing, and the three medals for goodness.""were any of the little pigs killed?""no, they all escaped.""the story began badly," said the smaller of the small girls, "but it had a beautiful ending.""it is the most beautiful story that i ever heard," said the bigger of the small girls, with immense decision."it is the only beautiful story i have ever heard," said cyril.a dissentient opinion came from the aunt."a most improper story to tell to young children! you have undermined the effect of years of careful teaching.""at any rate," said the bachelor, collecting his belongings preparatory to leaving the carriage, "i kept them quiet for ten minutes, which was more than you were able to do.""unhappy woman!" he observed to himself as he walked down the platform of templecombe station; "for the next six months or so those children will assail her in public with demands for an improper story!"morse found it nerve-racking to cross the st. jude grounds just as the school was being dismissed, because he felt that if he smiled at the uniformed catholic children they might think he was a wacko or pervert and if he didn't smile they might think he was an old grouch made bitter by the world, which surely, he felt, by certain yardsticks, he was. sometimes he wasn't entirely sure that he wasn't even a wacko of sorts, although certainly he wasn't a pervert.  of that he was certain.  or relatively certain.  being overly certain, he was relatively sure, was what eventually made one a wacko.  so humility was the thing, he thought, arranging his face into what he thought would pass for the expression of a man thinking fondly of his own youth, a face devoid of wackiness or perversion, humility was the  thing.the school sat among maples on a hillside that sloped down to the wide taganac river, which narrowed and picked up speed and crashed over bryce falls a mile downstream near morse's small rental house, his embarrassingly small rental house, actually, which nevertheless was the best he could do and for which he knew he should be grateful although at times he wasn't a bit grateful and wondered where he'd gone wrong, although at other times he was quite pleased with the crooked little blue shack covered with peeling lead paint and felt great pity for the poor stiffs renting hazardous shitholes even smaller than his hazardous shithole, which was how he felt now as he came down into the bright sunlight and continued his pleasant walk home along the green river lined with expensive mansions whose owners he deeply resented.morse was tall and thin and as gray and sepulchral as a church about to be condemned. his pants were too short, and his face periodically broke into a tense, involuntary grin that quickly receded, as if he had just suffered a sharp pain.  at work he was known to punctuate his conversations with brief wild laughs and gusts of inchoate enthusiasm and subsequent embarrassment, expressed by a sudden plunging of his hands into his pockets, after which he would yank his hands out of his pockets, too ashamed of his own shame to stand there merely grimacing for even an instant longer.from behind him on the path came a series of arrhythmic whacking steps. he glanced back to find aldo cummings, an odd duck, who though nearly forty, still lived with his mother.  cummings didn't work and had his bangs cut straight across and wore gym shorts even in the dead of winter.  morse hoped cummings wouldn't collar him. when cummings didn't collar him, and in fact passed by without even returning his nervous, self-effacing grin, morse felt guilty for having suspected cummings of wanting to collar him, then miffed that cummings, who collared even the city-hall cleaning staff, hadn't tried to collar him.  had he done something to offend cummings?  it worried him that cummings might not like him, and it worried him that he was worried about whether a nut like cummings liked him.  was he some kind of worry-wart?  it worried him.  why should he be worried when all he was doing was going home to enjoy his beautiful children without a care in the world, although on the other hand there was robert's piano recital, which was sure to be a disaster, since robert never practiced and they had no piano and weren't even sure where of when the recital was and annie, god bless her, had eaten the cardboard keyboard he'd made for robert to practice on.  when he got home he would make robert a new cardboard keyboard and beg him to practice.  he might even order him to practice.  he might even order him to make his own cardboard keyboard, then practice, although this was unlikely, because when he became forceful with robert, robert blubbered, and morse loved robert so much he couldn't stand to see him blubbering, although if he didn't become forceful with robert, robert tended to lie on his bed with his baseball glove over his face.good god, but life could be less than easy, not that he was unaware that it could certainly be a lot worse, but to go about in such a state, pulse high, face red, worried sick that someone would notice how nervous one was, was certainly less than ideal, and he felt sure that his body was secreting all kinds of harmful chemicals and that the more he worried about the harmful chemicals the faster they were pouring out of wherever it was they came from.when he got home, he would sit on the steps and enjoy a few minutes of centered breathing while reciting his mantra, which was "calm down calm down," before the kids came running out and grabbed his legs and sometimes even bit him quite hard in their excitement and ruth came out to remind him in an angry tone that he wasn't the only one who'd worked all day, and as he walked he gazed out at the beautiful taganac in an effort to absorb something of her serenity but instead found himself obsessing about the faulty hatch on the gate, which theoretically could allow annie to toddle out of the yard and into the river, and he pictured himself weeping on the shore, and to eradicate this thought started manically whistling "the stars and stripes forever," while slapping his hands against his sides.cummings bobbed past the restored gristmill, pleased at having so decisively snubbed morse, a smug member of the power elite in the conspiratorial village, one of the league of oppressive oppressors who wouldn't know the lot of the struggling artist if the lot of the struggling artist came up with great and beleaguered dignity and bit him on the polyester ass.  over the pen street bridge was a fat cloud.  to an interviewer in his head, cummings said he felt the possible rain made the fine bright day even finer and brighter because of the possibility of its loss. the possibility of its ephemeral loss.  the ephemeral loss of the day to the fleeting passages of time.  preening time.  preening nascent time, the blackguard.  time made wastrels of us all, did it not, with its gaunt cheeks and its tombly reverberations and its admonishing glances with bony fingers. bony fingers pointed as if in admonishment, as if to say, "i admonish you to recall your own eventual nascent death, which being on its way is forthcoming.  forthcoming, mortal coil, and don't think its ghastly pall won't settle on your furrowed brow, pronto, once i select your fated number from my very dusty book with the selfsame bony finger with which i'm pointing at you now, you vanity of vanities, you luster, you shirker of duties as you shuffle after your worldly pleasured centers."that was some good stuff, if only he could remember it through the rest of his stroll and the coming storm, to scrawl in a passionate hand in his yellow pad.  he thought with longing ardor of his blank yellow pad, he thought. he thought with longing ardor of his blank yellow pad on which, this selfsame day, his fame would be wrought, no, on which, this selfsame day, the first meager scrawlings which would presage his nascent burgeoning fame would be wrought, or rather writ, and someday someone would dig up his yellow pad and virtually cry eureka when they realized what a teeming fragment of minutiae, and yet crucial minutiae, had been found, and wouldn't all kinds of literary women in short black jackets want to meet him then!in the future he must always remember to bring his pad everywhere.the town had spent a mint on the riverfront, and now the burbling, smashing taganac ran past a nail salon in a restored gristmill and a cafe in a former coal tower and a quaint public square where some high-school boys with odd haircuts were trying to kick a soccer ball into the partly open window of a parked colt with a joy so belligerent and obnoxious that it seemed they believed themselves the first boys ever to walk the face of the earth, while morse found worrisome.  what if annie grew up and brought one of these freaks home?  not one of these exact freaks, of course, since they were approximately fifteen years her senior, although it was possible that at twenty she could bring home on of these exact freaks, who would then be approximately thirty-five, albeit over morse's dead body, although in his heart he knew he wouldn't make a stink about it even if she did bring home one the freaky snots who had just succeeded in kicking the ball into the colt and were now jumping around joyfully bumping their bare chests together while grunting like walruses, and in fact he knew perfectly well that, rather than expel the thirty-five-year-old freak from his home, he would likely offer him coffee or a soft drink in an attempt to dissuade him from corrupting annie, who for god's sake was just a baby, because morse knew very well the kind of man he was at heart, timid of conflict, conciliatory to a fault, pathetically gullible, and with a pang he remember len beck, who senior year had tricked him into painting his ass blue.  if there had actually been a secret blue-asser's club, if the ass-painting had in fact been required for membership, it would have been bad enough, but to find out on the eve of one's prom that one had painted one's ass blue simply for the amusement of a clique of unfeeling swimmers who subsequently supplied certain photographs to one's prom date, that was too much, and he had been glad, quite glad actually at least at first, when beck, drunk, had tried and failed to swim to foley's snag and been swept over the falls in the dark of night, the great tragedy of their senior year, a tragedy that had mercifully eclipsed morse's blue ass in the class's collective memory.two red-headed girls sailed by in a green canoe, drifting with the current.  they yelled something to him, and he waved.  had they yelled something insulting? certainly it was possible. certainly today's children had no respect for authority, although one had to admit there was always ben akbar, their neighbor, a little pakistani genius who sometimes made morse look askance at robert. ben was an all-state cellist, on the wrestling team, who was unfailingly sweet to smaller kids and tole-painted and could do a one-handed pushup. ah, ben shmen, morse thought, ten bens weren't worth a single robert, although he couldn't think of one area in which robert was superior or even equal to ben, the little smarty-pants, although certainly he had nothing against ben being a mere boy but if ben thought for a minute that his being more accomplished and friendly and talented than robert somehow entitled him to lord it over robert, ben had another think coming, not that ben had ever actually lorded it over robert. on the contrary, robert often lorded it over ben, or tried to although he always failed, because ben was too sharp to be taken in by a little con man like robert, and morse's face reddened at the realization that he had just characterized his own son as a con man.boy, oh boy, could life be a torture. could life ever force a fellow into a strange, dark place from which he found himself doing graceless, unforgivable things like casting aspersions on his beloved firstborn.  if only he could escape blascorp and do something significant, such as discovering a critical vaccine.  but it was too late, and he had never been good at biology and in fact had flunked it twice.  but some kind of moment in the sun would certainly not be unwelcome.  if only he could be a tortured prisoner of war who not only refused to talk but led the other prisoners in rousing hymns at great personal risk.  if only he could witness an actual miracle or save the president from an assassin or win the lotto and give it all to charity. if only he could be part of some great historical event like the codgers he saw on pbs who had been slugged in the haymarket riot or known medgar evers or lost beautific mothers on the titanic. his childhood dreams had been so bright, he had hoped for so much, it couldn't be true that he was a nobody, although, on the other hand, what kind of somebody spends the best years of his life swearing at a photocopier? not that he was complaining. not that he was unaware he had plenty to be thankful for. he loved his children. he loved the way ruth looked in bed by candlelight when he had wedged the laundry basket against the door that wouldn't shut because the house was settling alarmingly, loved the face she made when he entered her, love the way she made light of the blue-ass story, although he didn't particularly love that she sometimes trotted it out when they were fighting-for example, on the dreadful night when the piano had been repossessed-or the way she blamed his passivity for their poverty within earshot of the kids or the fact that at the height of her infatuation with robert's karate instructor, master li, she had been dragging robert to class as often as six times a week, the poor little exhausted guy, but the point was, in spite of certain difficulties he truly loved ruth. so what if their bodies were failing and fattening and they undressed in the dark and robert admired strapping athletes on television while looking askance at morse's rounded, pimpled back?  it didn't matter, because someday, when robert had a rounded, pimpled back of his own, he would appreciate his father, who had subjugated his petty personal desires for the good of his family, although, god willing, robert would have a decent career by then and could afford to join a gym and see a dermatologist.and morse stopped in his tracks, wondering what in the world two little girls were doing alone in a canoe speeding toward the falls, apparently oarless.cummings walked along, gazing into a mythic dusky arboreal wood that put him in mind of the archetypal vision he had numbered 114 in his "book of archetypal visions," on which mom that nitwit had recently spilled grape pop.  vision 114 concerned standing on the edge of an ancient dense wood at twilight, with the safe harbor of one's abode behind and the deep wild ahead, replete with dark fearsome bears looming from albeit dingy covens. what would that twitching nervous wage slave morse think if he were to dip his dim brow into the heady brew that was the "archetypal visions"?  morse ha, cummings thought, i'm glad i'm not morse, a dullard in corporate pants trudging home to his threadbare brats in the gathering loam, born, like the rest of his ilk with their feet of clay thrust down the maw of conventionality, content to cheerfully work lemminglike in moribund cubicles while comparing their stocks and bonds between bouts of tedious lawn mowing, then chortling while holding their suckling brats to the nintendo beast. that was a powerful image, cummings thought, one that he might develop some brooding night into a herculean prome that some hollywood smoothie would eat like a hotcake, so he could buy mom a lexus and go with someone leggy and blousy to paris after taking some time to build up his body with arm curls so as to captivate her physically as well as mentally, and in paris the leggy girl, in perhaps tight leather pants, would sit on an old-time bed with a beautiful shawl or blanket around her shoulders and gaze at him with doe eyes as he stood on the balcony brooding about the parisian rain and so forth, and wouldn't morse and his ilk stew in considerable juice when he sent home a postcard just to be nice!and wouldn't the village fall before him on repentant knees when t-shirts imprinted with his hard-won visage, his heraldic leonine visage, one might say were available to all at the five-and-dime and he held court on the porch in a white whitmanesque suit while mom hovered behind him getting everything wrong about his work and profering inane snacks to his manifold admirers, and wouldn't revenge be sent when such former football players as ned wentz began begging him for lessons in the sonnet?  and all that was required for these things to come to pass was some paper and pens and a quixotic blathering talent the likes of which would not be seen again soon, the critics would write, all of which he had in spades, and he rounded the last bend before the falls, euphoric with his own possibilities, and saw a canoe the color of summer leaves ram the steep upstream wall of the snag. the girls inside were thrown forward and shrieked with open mouths over frothing waves that would not let them be heard as the boat split open along some kind of seam and began taking on water in doomful fast quantities.  cummings stood stunned, his body electrified, hairs standing up on the back of his craning neck, thinking, i must do something, their faces are bloody, but what, such fast cold water, still i must do something, and he stumbled over the berm uncertainly, looking for help but finding only a farm field of tall dry corn.morse began to run. in all probability this was silly. in all probability the girls were safe onshore, or, if not, help was already on its way, although certainly it was possible that the girls were not safe onshore and help was not on its way, and in fact it was even possible that the help that was on its way was him, which was worrisome, because he had never been good under pressure and in a crisis often stood mentally debating possible options with his mouth hanging open.  come to think of it, it was possible, even probable, that the boat had already gone over the falls or hit the snag.  he remembered the crew of the barge fat chance, rescued via rope bridge in the early carter years.  he hoped several sweaty, decisive men were already on the scene and that one of them would send him off to make a phone call, although what if on the way he forgot the phone number and had to go back and ask the sweaty decisive man to repeat it?  and what if this failure got back to ruth and she was filled with shame and divorced him and forbade him to see the kids, who didn't want to see him anyway because he was such a panicky screwup?  this was certainly not positive thinking.  this was certainly an example of predestining failure via negativity.  because, who could tell, maybe he would stand in line assisting the decisive men and incur a nasty rope burn and go home a hero wearing a bandage, which might cause ruth to regard him in a more favorable sexual light, and they would stay up all night celebrating his new manhood and exchanging sweet words between bouts of energetic lovemaking, although what kind of thing was that to be thinking at a time like this, with children's lives at stake?  he was bad, that was for sure.  there wasn't an earnest bone in his body.  other people were simpler and looked at the world with clearer eyes, but he was self-absorbed and insincere and mucked everything up, and he hoped this wasn't one more thing he was destined to muck up, because mucking up a rescue was altogether different from forgetting to mail out the invitations to your son's birthday party, which he had recently done, although certainly they had spent a small fortune rectifying the situation, stopping just short of putting an actual pony on visa, but the point was, this was serious and he had to bear down.  and throwing his thin legs out ahead of him, awkwardly bent at the waist, shirttails trailing behind and bum knee hurting, he remonstrated with himself to put aside all self-doubt and negativity and prepare to assist the decisive men in whatever way he could once he had rounded the bend and assessed the situation.but when he rounded the bend and assessed the situation, he found no rope bridge or decisive men, only a canoe coming apart at the base of the snag and two small girls in matching sweaters trying to bail with a bait bucket.  what to do?  this was a shocker.  go for help?  sprint to the outlet mall and call 911 from knife world?  there was no time.  the canoe was sinking before his eyes.  the girls would be drowned before he reached route 8.  could one swim to the snag?  certainly one could not.  no one ever had. was he a good swimmer?  he was mediocre at best.  therefore he would have to run for help. but running was futile.  because there was no time.  he had just decided that.  and swimming was out of the question.  therefore the girls would die.  they were basically dead.  although that couldn't be.  that was too sad.  what would become of the mother who this morning had dressed them in matching sweaters?  how would she cope?  soon her girls would be nude and bruised and dead on a table.  it was unthinkable.  he thought of robert nude and bruised and dead on a table.  what to do?  he fiercely wished himself elsewhere.  the girls saw him now and with their hands appeared to be trying to explain that they would be dead soon.  my god did they think he was blind?  did they think he was stupid?  was he their father?  did they think he was christ?  they were dead.  they were frantic,  calling out to him, but they were dead,  as dead as the ancient dead and he was alive, he was needed at home, it was a no-brainer, no one could possible blame him for his one, and making a low sound of despair in his throat he kicked off his loafers and threw his long ugly body out across the water.fifth avenue was shining in the sun when they left the brevoort and started walking toward washington square. the sun was warm, even though it was november, and everything looked like sunday morning--the buses, and the well-dressed people walking slowly in couples and the quiet buildings with the windows closed.michael held frances' arm tightly as they walked downtown in the sunlight. they walked lightly, almost smiling, because they had slept late and had a good breakfast and it was sunday. michael unbuttoned his coat and let it flap around him in the mild wind. they walked, without saying anything, among the young and pleasant-looking people who somehow seem to make up most of the population of that section of new york city."look out," frances said, as they crossed eighth street. "you'll break your neck."michael laughed and frances laughed with him."she's not so pretty, anyway," frances said. "anyway, not pretty enough to take a chance breaking your neck looking at her."michael laughed again. he laughed louder this time, but not as solidly. "she wasn't a bad-looking girl. she had a nice complexion. country-girl complexion. how did you know i was looking at her?"   frances cocked her head to one side and smiled at her husband under the tip-tilted brim of her hat. "mike, darling . . ." she said.michael laughed, just a little laugh this time. "okay," he said. "the evidence is in. excuse me. it was the complexion. it's not the sort of complexion you see much in new york. excuse me."frances patted his arm lightly and pulled him along a little faster toward washington square."this is a nice morning," she said. "this is a wonderful morning. when i have breakfast with you it makes me feel good all day.""tonic," michael said. "morning pickup. rolls and coffee with mike and you're on the alkali side, guaranteed.""that's the story. also, i slept all night, wound around you like a rope.""saturday night," he said. "i permit such liberties only when the week's work is done.""you're getting fat," she said."isn't it the truth? the lean man from ohio.""i love it," she said, "an extra five pounds of husband.""i love it, too," michael said gravely."i have an idea," frances said."my wife has an idea. that pretty girl.""let's not see anybody all day," frances said. "let's just hang around with each other. you and me. we're always up to our neck in people, drinking their scotch, or drinking our scotch, we only see each other in bed . . .""the great meeting place," michael said. "stay in bed long enough and everybody you ever knew will show up there.""wise guy," frances said. "i'm talking serious.""okay, i'm listening serious.""i want to go out with my husband all day long. i want him to talk only to me and listen only to me.""what's to stop us?" michael asked. "what party intends to prevent me from seeing my wife alone on sunday? what party?""the stevensons. they want us to drop by around one o'clock and they'll drive us into the country.""the lousy stevensons," mike said. "transparent. they can whistle. they can go driving in the country by themselves. my wife and i have to stay in new york and bore each other tâte-â-tâte.""is it a date?""it's a date."frances leaned over and kissed him on the tip of the ear."darling," michael said. "this is fifth avenue.""let me arrange a program," frances said. "a planned sunday in new york for a young couple with money to throw away.""go easy.""first let's go see a football game. a professional football game," frances said, because she knew michael loved to watch them. "the giants are playing. and it'll be nice to be outside all day today and get hungry and later we'll go down to cavanagh's and get a steak as big as a blacksmith's apron, with a bottle of wine, and after that, there's a new french picture at the filmarte that everybody says... say, are you listening to me?""sure," he said. he took his eyes off the hatless girl with the dark hair, cut dancer-style, like a helmet, who was walking past him with the self-conscious strength and grace dancers have. she was walking without a coat and she looked very solid and strong and her belly was flat, like a boy's, under her skirt, and her hips swung boldly because she was a dancer and also because she knew michael was looking at her. she smiled a little to herself as she went past and michael noticed all these things before he looked back at his wife. "sure," he said, "we're going to watch the giants and we're going to eat steak and we're going to see a french picture. how do you like that?""that's it," frances said flatly. "that's the program for the day. or maybe you'd just rather walk up and down fifth avenue.""no," michael said carefully. "not at all.""you always look at other women," frances said. "at every damn woman in the city of new york.""oh, come now," michael said, pretending to joke. "only pretty ones. and, after all, how many pretty women are there in new york? seventeen?""more. at least you seem to think so. wherever you go.""not the truth. occasionally, maybe, i look at a woman as she passes. in the street. i admit, perhaps in the street i look at a woman once in a while. . . .""everywhere," frances said. "every damned place we go. restaurants, subways, theaters, lectures, concerts.""now, darling," michael said. "i look at everything. god gave me eyes and i look at women and men and subway excavations and moving pictures and the little flowers of the field. i casually inspect the universe.""you ought to see the look in your eye," frances said, "as you casually inspect the universe on fifth avenue.""i'm a happily married man." michael pressed her elbow tenderly, knowing what he was doing. "example for the whole twentieth century, mr. and mrs. mike loomis.""you mean it?""frances, baby . . .""are you really happily married?""sure," michael said, feeling the whole sunday morning sinking like lead inside him. "now what the hell is the sense in talking like that?""i would like to know." frances walked faster now, looking straight ahead, her face showing nothing, which was the way she always managed it when she was arguing or feeling bad."i'm wonderfully happily married," michael said patiently. "i am the envy of all men between the ages of fifteen and sixty in the state of new york.""stop kidding," frances said."i have a fine home," michael said. "i got nice books and a phonograph and nice friends. i live in a town i like the way i like and i do the work i like and i live with the woman i like. whenever something good happens, don't i run to you? when something bad happens, don't i cry on your shoulder?""yes," frances said. "you look at every woman that passes.""that's an exaggeration.""every woman." frances took her hand off michael's arm. "if she's not pretty you turn away fairly quickly. if she's halfway pretty you watch her for about seven steps. . . .""my lord, frances!""if she's pretty you practically break your neck . . .""hey, let's have a drink," michael said, stopping."we just had breakfast.""now, listen, darling," mike said, choosing his words with care, "it's a nice day and we both feel good and there's no reason why we have to break it up. let's have a nice sunday.""i could have a fine sunday if you didn't look as though you were dying to run after every skirt on fifth avenue.""let's have a drink," michael said."i don't want a drink.""what do you want, a fight?""no," frances said, so unhappily that michael felt terribly sorry for her. "i don't want a fight. i don't know why i started this. all right, let's drop it. let's have a good time."they joined hands consciously and walked without talking among the baby carriages and the old italian men in their sunday clothes and the young women with scotties in washington square park."i hope it's a good game today," frances said after a while, her tone a good imitation of the tone she had used at breakfast and at the beginning of their walk. "i like professional football games. they hit each other as though they're made out of concrete. when they tackle each other," she said, trying to make michael laugh, "they make divots. it's very exciting.""i want to tell you something," michael said very seriously. "i have not touched another woman. not once. in all the five years.""all right," frances said."you believe that, don't you?""all right."they walked between the crowded benches, under the scrubby citypark trees."i try not to notice it," frances said, as though she were talking to herself. "i try to make believe it doesn't mean anything. some men're like that, i tell myself, they have to see what they're missing.""some women're like that, too," michael said. "in my time i've seen a couple of ladies.""i haven't even looked at another man," frances said, walking straight ahead, "since the second time i went out with you.""there's no law," michael said."i feel rotten inside, in my stomach, when we pass a woman and you look at her and i see that look in your eye and that's the way you looked at me the first time, in alice maxwell's house. standing there in the living room, next to the radio, with a green hat on and all those people.""i remember the hat," michael said."the same look," frances said. "and it makes me feel bad. it makes me feel terrible.""sssh, please, darling, sssh. . . .""i think i would like a drink now," frances said.they walked over to a bar on eighth street, not saying anything, michael automatically helping her over curbstones and guiding her past automobiles. he walked, buttoning his coat, looking thoughtfully at his neatly shined heavy brown shoes as they made the steps toward the bar. they sat near a window in the bar and the sun streamed in, and there was a small cheerful fire in the fireplace. a little japanese waiter came over and put down some pretzels and smiled happily at them."what do you order after breakfast?" michael asked."brandy, i suppose," frances said."courvoisier," michael told the waiter. "two courvoisier."the waiter came with the glasses and they sat drinking the brandy in the sunlight. michael finished half his and drank a little water."i look at women," he said. "correct. i don't say it's wrong or right, i look at them. if i pass them on the street and i don't look at them, i'm fooling you, i'm fooling myself.""you look at them as though you want them," frances said, playing with her brandy glass. "every one of them.""in a way," michael said, speaking softly and not to his wife, "in a way that's true. i don't do anything about it, but it's true.""i know it. that's why i feel bad.""another brandy," michael called. "waiter, two more brandies.""why do you hurt me?" frances asked. "what're you doing?"michael sighed and closed his eyes and rubbed them gently with his fingertips. "i love the way women look. one of the things i like best about new york is the battalions of women. when i first came to new york from ohio that was the first thing i noticed, the million wonderful women, all over the city. i walked around with my heart in my throat.""a kid," frances said. "that's a kid's feeling.""guess again," michael said. "guess again. i'm older now, i'm a man getting near middle age, putting on a little fat and i still love to walk along fifth avenue at three o'clock on the east side of the street between fiftieth and fifty-seventh streets, they're all out then, making believe they're shopping, in their furs and their crazy hats, everything all concentrated from all over the world into eight blocks, the best furs, the best clothes, the handsomest women, out to spend money and feeling good about it, looking coldly at you, making believe they're not looking at you as you go past."the japanese waiter put the two drinks down, smiling with great happiness."everything is all right?" he asked."everything is wonderful," michael said."if it's just a couple of fur coats," frances said, "and forty-five-dollar hats . . .""it's not the fur coats. or the hats. that's just the scenery for that particular kind of woman. understand," he said, "you don't have to listen to this.""i want to listen.""i like the girls in the offices. neat, with their eyeglasses, smart, chipper, knowing what everything is about, taking care of themselves all the time." he kept his eye on the people going slowly past outside the window. "i like the girls on forty-fourth street at lunchtime, the actresses, all dressed up on nothing a week, talking to the good-looking boys, wearing themselves out being young and vivacious outside sardi's, waiting for producers to look at them. i like the salesgirls in macy's, paying attention to you first because you're a man, leaving lady customers waiting, flirting with you over socks and books and phonograph needles. i got all this stuff accumulated in me because i've been thinking about it for ten years and now you've asked for it and here it is.""go ahead," frances said."when i think of new york city, i think of all the girls, the jewish girls, the italian girls, the irish, polack, chinese, german, negro, spanish, russian girls, all on parade in the city. i don't know whether it's something special with me or whether every man in the city walks around with the same feeling inside him, but i feel as though i'm at a picnic in this city. i like to sit near the women in the theaters, the famous beauties who've taken six hours to get ready and look it. and the young girls at the football games, with the red cheeks, and when the warm weather comes, the girls in their summer dresses . . ." he finished his drink. "that's the story. you asked for it, remember. i can't help but look at them. i can't help but want them.""you want them," frances repeated without expression. "you said that.""right," michael said, being cruel now and not caring, because she had made him expose himself. "you brought this subject up for discussion, we will discuss it fully."frances finished her drink and swallowed two or three times extra. "you say you love me?""i love you, but i also want them. okay.""i'm pretty, too," frances said. "as pretty as any of them.""you're beautiful," michael said, meaning it."i'm good for you," frances said, pleading. "i've made a good wife, a good housekeeper, a good friend. i'd do any damn thing for you.""i know," michael said. he put his hand out and grasped hers."you'd like to be free to . . ." frances said."sssh.""tell the truth." she took her hand away from under his.michael flicked the edge of his glass with his finger. "okay," he said gently. "sometimes i feel i would like to be free.""well," frances said defiantly, drumming on the table, "anytime you say . . .""don't be foolish." michael swung his chair around to her side of the table and patted her thigh.she began to cry, silently, into her handkerchief, bent over just enough so that nobody else in the bar would notice. "someday," she said, crying, "you're going to make a move . . ."michael didn't say anything. he sat watching the bartender slowly peel a lemon."aren't you?" frances asked harshly. "come on, tell me. talk. aren't you?""maybe," michael said. he moved his chair back again. "how the hell do i know?""you know," frances persisted. "don't you know?""yes," michael said after a while. "i know."frances stopped crying then. two or three snuffles into the handkerchief and she put it away and her face didn't tell anything to anybody. "at least do me one favor," she said."sure.""stop talking about how pretty this woman is, or that one. nice eyes, nice breasts, a pretty figure, good voice," she mimicked his voice. "keep it to yourself. i'm not interested.""excuse me." michael waved to the waiter. "i'll keep it to myself."frances flicked the corner of her eyes. "another brandy," she told the waiter."two," michael said."yes, ma'am, yes, sir," said the waiter, backing away.frances regarded him coolly across the table. "do you want me to call the stevensons?" she asked. "it'll be nice in the country.""sure," michael said. "call them up."she got up from the table and walked across the room toward the telephone. michael watched her walk, thinking, what a pretty girl, what nice legs.unless they alter their course and there's no reason why they should, they'll reach your plantation in two days at the latest."leiningen sucked placidly at a cigar about the size of a corncob and for a few seconds gazed without answering at the agitated district commissioner. then he took the cigar from his lips, and leaned slightly forward. with his bristling grey hair, bulky nose, and lucid eyes, he had the look of an aging and shabby eagle."decent of you," he murmured, "paddling all this way just to give me the tip. but you're pulling my  leg of course when you say i must do a bunk. why, even a herd of saurians couldn't drive me from  this plantation of mine."the brazilian official threw up lean and lanky arms and clawed the air with wildly distended fingers.  "leiningen!" he shouted. "you're insane! they're not creatures you can fight--they're an  elemental--an 'act of god!' ten miles long, two miles wide--ants, nothing but ants! and every single  one of them a fiend from hell; before you can spit three times they'll eat a full-grown buffalo to the  bones. i tell you if you don't clear out at once there'll he nothing left of you but a skeleton picked as  clean as your own plantation."leiningen grinned. "act of god, my eye! anyway, i'm not an old woman; i'm not going to run for it  just because an elemental's on the way. and don't think i'm the kind of fathead who tries to fend off  lightning with his fists either. i use my intelligence, old man. with me, the brain isn't a second  blindgut; i know what it's there for. when i began this model farm and plantation three years ago, i  took into account all that could conceivably happen to it. and now i'm ready for anything and  everything--including your ants."the brazilian rose heavily to his feet. "i've done my best," he gasped. "your obstinacy endangers  not only yourself, but the lives of your four hundred workers. you don't know these ants!"leiningen accompanied him down to the river, where the government launch was moored. the  vessel cast off. as it moved downstream, the exclamation mark neared the rail and began waving  its arms frantically. long after the launch had disappeared round the bend, leiningen thought he  could still hear that dimming imploring voice, "you don't know them, i tell you! you don't know  them!"but the reported enemy was by no means unfamiliar to the planter. before he started work on his  settlement, he had lived long enough in the country to see for himself the fearful devastations  sometimes wrought by these ravenous insects in their campaigns for food. but since then he had  planned measures of defence accordingly, and these, he was convinced? were in every way  adequate to withstand the approaching peril.moreover, during his three years as a planter, leiningen had met and defeated drought, hood,  plague and all other "acts of god" which had come against him-unlike his fellow-settlers in the  district, who had made little or no resistance. this unbroken success he attributed solely to the  observance of his lifelong motto: the human brain needs only to become fully aware of its powers  to conquer even the elements. dullards reeled senselessly and aimlessly into the abyss; cranks,  however brilliant, lost their heads when circumstances suddenly altered or accelerated and ran into  stone walls, sluggards drifted with the current until they were caught in whirlpools and dragged  under. but such disasters, leiningen contended, merely strengthened his argument that  intelligence, directed aright, invariably makes man the master of his fate.yes, leiningen had always known how to grapple with life. even here, in this brazilian wilderness,  his brain had triumphed over every difficulty and danger it had so far encountered. first he had  vanquished primal forces by cunning and organization, then he had enlisted the resources of  modern science to increase miraculously the yield of his plantation. and now he was sure he would  prove more than a match for the "irresistible" ants.that same evening, however, leiningen assembled his workers. he had no intention of waiting till  the news reached their ears from other sources. most of them had been born in the district; the cry  "the ants are coming!'" was to them an imperative signal for instant, panic-stricken flight, a spring  for life itself. but so great was the indians' trust in leiningen, in leiningen's word, and in leiningen's  wisdom, that they received his curt tidings, and his orders for the imminent struggle, with the  calmness with which they were given. they waited, unafraid, alert, as if for the beginning of a new  game or hunt which he had just described to them. the ants were indeed mighty, but not so mighty  as the boss. let them come!they came at noon the second day. their approach was announced by the wild unrest of the  horses, scarcely controllable now either in stall or under rider, scenting from afar a vapor instinct  with horror.it was announced by a stampede of animals, timid and savage, hurtling past each other; jaguars  and pumas flashing by nimble stags of the pampas, bulky tapirs, no longer hunters, themselves  hunted, outpacing fleet kinkajous, maddened herds of cattle, heads lowered, nostrils snorting,  rushing through tribes of loping monkeys, chattering in a dementia of terror; then followed the  creeping and springing denizens of bush and steppe, big and little rodents, snakes, and lizards.pell-mell the rabble swarmed down the hill to the plantation, scattered right and left before the  barrier of the water-filled ditch, then sped onwards to the river, where, again hindered, they fled along its bank out of sight.this water-filled ditch was one of the defence measures which leiningen had long since prepared  against the advent of the ants. it encompassed three sides of the plantation like a huge horseshoe.  twelve feet across, but not very deep, when dry it could hardly be described as an obstacle to  either man or beast. but the ends of the "horseshoe" ran into the river which formed the northern  boundary, and fourth side, of the plantation. and at the end nearer the house and outbuildings in  the middle of the plantation, leiningen had constructed a dam by means of which water from the  river could be diverted into the ditch.so now, by opening the dam, he was able to fling an imposing girdle of water, a huge quadrilateral  with the river as its base, completely around the plantation, like the moat encircling a medieval city.  unless the ants were clever enough to build rafts. they had no hope of reaching the plantation,  leiningen concluded.the twelve-foot water ditch seemed to afford in itself all the security needed. but while awaiting the  arrival of the ants, leiningen made a further improvement. the western section of the ditch ran  along the edge of a tamarind wood, and the branches of some great trees reached over the water.  leiningen now had them lopped so that ants could not descend from them within the "moat."the women and children, then the herds of cattle, were escorted by peons on rafts over the river, to  remain on the other side in absolute safety until the plunderers had departed. leiningen gave this  instruction, not because he believed the non-combatants were in any danger, but in order to avoid  hampering the efficiency of the defenders. "critical situations first become crises," he explained to  his men, "when oxen or women get excited "finally, he made a careful inspection of the "inner moat"--a smaller ditch lined with concrete, which  extended around the hill on which stood the ranch house, barns, stables and other buildings. into  this concrete ditch emptied the inflow pipes from three great petrol tanks. if by some miracle the  ants managed to cross the water and reached the plantation, this "rampart of petrol,' would be an  absolutely impassable protection for the beseiged and their dwellings and stock. such, at least,  was leiningen's opinion.he stationed his men at irregular distances along the water ditch, the first line of defence. then he  lay down in his hammock and puffed drowsily away at his pipe until a peon came with the report  that the ants had been observed far away in the south.leiningen mounted his horse, which at the feel of its master seemed to forget its uneasiness, and  rode leisurely in the direction of the threatening offensive. the southern stretch of ditch--the upper  side of the quadrilateral--was nearly three miles long; from its center one could survey the entire  countryside. this was destined to be the scene of the outbreak of war between leiningen's brain  and twenty square miles of life-destroying ants.it was a sight one could never forget. over the range of hills, as far as eye  could see, crept a darkening hem, ever longer and broader, until the shadow spread across the  slope from east to west, then downwards, downwards, uncannily swift, and all the green herbage of  that wide vista was being mown as by a giant sickle, leaving only the vast moving shadow,  extending, deepening, and moving rapidly nearer.when leiningen's men, behind their barrier of water, perceived the approach of the long-expected  foe, they gave vent to their suspense in screams and imprecations. but as the distance began to  lessen between the "sons of hell" and the water ditch, they relapsed into silence. before the  advance of that awe-inspiring throng, their belief in the powers of the boss began to steadily  dwindle.even leiningen himself, who had ridden up just in time to restore their loss of heart by a display of  unshakable calm, even he could not free himself from a qualm of malaise. yonder were thousands  of millions of voracious jaws bearing down upon him and only a suddenly insignificant, narrow ditch  lay between him and his men and being gnawed to the bones "before you can spit three times."hadn't this brain for once taken on more than it could manage? if the blighters decided to rush the  ditch, fill it to the brim with their corpses, there'd still be more than enough to destroy every trace of  that cranium of his. the planter's chin jutted; they hadn't got him yet, and he'd see to it they never  would. while he could think at all, he'd flout both death and the devil.the hostile army was approaching in perfect formation; no human battalions, however well-drilled,  could ever hope to rival the precision of that advance. along a front that moved forward as uniformly  as a straight line, the ants drew nearer and nearer to the water ditch. then, when they learned  through their scouts the nature of the obstacle, the two outlying wings of the army detached  themselves from the main body and marched down the western and eastern sides of the ditch.this surrounding maneuver took rather more than an hour to accomplish; no doubt the ants  expected that at some point they would find a crossing.during this outflanking movement by the wings, the army on the center and southern front remained still. the besieged were therefore able to contemplate at their leisure the thumb-long, reddish black,  long-legged insects; some of the indians believed they could see, too, intent on them, the brilliant,  cold eyes, and the razor-edged mandibles, of this host of infinity.it is not easy for the average person to imagine that an animal, not to mention an insect, can think.  but now both the european brain of leiningen and the primitive brains of the indians began to stir  with the unpleasant foreboding that inside every single one of that deluge of insects dwelt a  thought. and that thought was: ditch or no ditch, we'll get to your flesh!not until four o'clock did the wings reach the "horseshoe" ends of the ditch, only to find these ran  into the great river. through some kind of secret telegraphy, the report must then have flashed very  swiftly indeed along the entire enemy line. and leiningen, riding--no longer casually--along his side of the ditch,  noticed by energetic and widespread movements of troops that for some unknown reason the news  of the check had its greatest effect on the southern front, where the main army was massed.  perhaps the failure to find a way over the ditch was persuading the ants to withdraw from the  plantation in search of spoils more easily attainable.an immense flood of ants, about a hundred yards in width, was pouring in a glimmering-black  cataract down the far slope of the ditch. many thousands were already drowning in the sluggish  creeping flow, but they were followed by troop after troop, who clambered over their sinking  comrades, and then themselves served as dying bridges to the reserves hurrying on in their rear.shoals of ants were being carried away by the current into the middle of the ditch, where gradually  they broke asunder and then, exhausted by their struggles, vanished below the surface.  nevertheless, the wavering, floundering hundred-yard front was remorselessly if slowly advancing  towards the beseiged on the other bank. leiningen had been wrong when he supposed the enemy  would first have to fill the ditch with their bodies before they could cross; instead, they merely  needed to act as steppingstones, as they swam and sank, to the hordes ever pressing onwards  from behind.near leiningen a few mounted herdsmen awaited his orders. he sent one to the weir-the river  must be dammed more strongly to increase the speed and power of the water coursing through the  ditch.a second peon was dispatched to the outhouses to bring spades and petrol sprinklers. a third rode  away to summon to the zone of the offensive all the men, except the observation posts, on the  near-by sections of the ditch, which were not yet actively threatened.the ants were getting across far more quickly than leiningen would have deemed possible.  impelled by the mighty cascade behind them, they struggled nearer and nearer to the inner bank.  the momentum of the attack was so great that neither the tardy flow of the stream nor its  downward pull could exert its proper force; and into the gap left by every submerging insect,  hastened forward a dozen more.when reinforcements reached leiningen, the invaders were halfway over. the planter had to admit  to himself that it was only by a stroke of luck for him that the ants were attempting the crossing on  a relatively short front: had they assaulted simultaneously along the entire length of the ditch, the  outlook for the defenders would have been black indeed.even as it was, it could hardly be described as rosy, though the planter seemed quite unaware that  death in a gruesome form was drawing closer and closer. as the war between his brain and the  "act of god'' reached its climax, the very shadow of annihilation began to pale to leiningen, who  now felt like a champion in a new olympic game, a gigantic and thrilling contest, from which he  was determined to emerge victor. such, indeed, was his aura of confidence that the indians forgot  their stupefied fear of the peril only a yard or two away; under the planter's supervision, they began  fervidly digging up to the edge of the bank and throwing clods of earth and spadefuls of sand into  the midst of the hostile fleet.the petrol sprinklers, hitherto used to destroy pests and blights on the plantation, were also  brought into action. streams of evil-reeking oil now soared and fell over an enemy already in  disorder through the bombardment of earth and sand.the ants responded to these vigorous and successful measures of defence by further developments  of their offensive. entire clumps of huddling insects began to roll down the opposite bank into the  water. at the same time, leiningen noticed that the ants were now attacking along an  ever-widening front. as the numbers both of his men and his petrol sprinklers were severely limited,  this rapid extension of the line of battle was becoming an overwhelming danger.to add to his difficulties, the very clods of earth they flung into that black floating carpet often  whirled fragments toward the defenders' side, and here and there dark ribbons were already  mounting the inner bank. true, wherever a man saw these they could still be driven back into the  water by spadefuls of earth or jets of petrol. but the file of defenders was too sparse and scattered  to hold off at all points these landing parties, and though the peons toiled like madmen, their plight  became momentarily more perilous.one man struck with his spade at an enemy clump, did not draw it back quickly enough from the  water; in a trice the wooden shaft swarmed with upward scurrying insects. with a curse, he  dropped the spade into the ditch; too late, they were already on his body. they lost no time;  wherever they encountered bare flesh they bit deeply; a few, bigger than the rest, carried in their hind-quarters a sting which injected a burning and paralyzing venom. screaming, frantic with pain,  the peon danced and twirled like a dervish.realizing that another such casualty, yes, perhaps this alone, might plunge his men into confusion  and destroy their morale, leiningen roared in a bellow louder than the yells of the victim: "into the  petrol, idiot! douse your paws in the petrol!" the dervish ceased his pirouette as if transfixed, then  tore of his shirt and plunged his arm and the ants hanging to it up to the shoulder in one of the large  open tins of petrol. but even then the fierce mandibles did not slacken; another peon had to help  him squash and detach each separate insect.distracted by the episode, some defenders had turned away from the ditch. and now cries of fury,  a thudding of spades, and a wild trampling to and fro, showed that the ants had made full use of the  interval, though luckily only a few had managed to get across. the men set to work again  desperately with the barrage of earth and sand. meanwhile an old indian, who acted as  medicine-man to the plantation workers, gave the bitten peon a drink he had prepared some hours  before, which, he claimed, possessed the virtue of dissolving and weakening ants' venom.leiningen surveyed his position. a dispassionate observer would have estimated the odds against  him at a thousand to one. but then such an on-looker would have reckoned only by what he saw--the advance of myriad battalions of ants against  the futile efforts of a few defenders--and not by the unseen activity that can go on in a man's brain.for leiningen had not erred when he decided he would fight elemental with elemental. the water in  the ditch was beginning to rise; the stronger damming of the river was making itself apparent.visibly the swiftness and power of the masses of water increased, swirling into quicker and quicker  movement its living black surface, dispersing its pattern, carrying away more and more of it on the  hastening current.victory had been snatched from the very jaws of defeat. with a hysterical shout of joy, the peons  feverishly intensified their bombardment of earth clods and sand.and now the wide cataract down the opposite bank was thinning and ceasing, as if the ants were  becoming aware that they could not attain their aim. they were scurrying back up the slope to  safety.all the troops so far hurled into the ditch had been sacrificed in vain. drowned and floundering  insects eddied in thousands along the flow, while indians running on the bank destroyed every  swimmer that reached the side.not until the ditch curved towards the east did the scattered ranks assemble again in a coherent  mass. and now, exhausted and half-numbed, they were in no condition to ascend the bank.  fusillades of clods drove them round the bend towards the mouth of the ditch and then into the  river, wherein they vanished without leaving a trace.the news ran swiftly along the entire chain of outposts, and soon a long scattered line of laughing  men could be seen hastening along the ditch towards the scene of victory.for once they seemed to have lost all their native reserve, for it was in wild abandon now they  celebrated the triumph--as if there were no longer thousands of millions of merciless, cold and  hungry eyes watching them from the opposite bank, watching and waiting.the sun sank behind the rim of the tamarind wood and twilight deepened into night. it was not only  hoped but expected that the ants would remain quiet until dawn. "but to defeat any forlorn attempt  at a crossing, the flow of water through the ditch was powerfully increased by opening the dam still  further.in spite of this impregnable barrier, leiningen was not yet altogether convinced that the ants would  not venture another surprise attack. he ordered his men to camp along the bank overnight. he also  detailed parties of them to patrol the ditch in two of his motor cars and ceaselessly to illuminate the  surface of the water with headlights and electric torches.after having taken all the precautions he deemed necessary, the farmer ate his supper with  considerable appetite and went to bed. his slumbers were in no wise disturbed by the memory of  the waiting, live, twenty square miles.dawn found a thoroughly refreshed and active leiningen riding along the edge of the ditch. the  planter saw before him a motionless and unaltered throng of besiegers. he studied the wide belt of water between them and the plantation, and  for a moment almost regretted that the fight had ended so soon and so simply. in the comforting,  matter-of-fact light of morning, it seemed to him now that the ants hadn't the ghost of a chance to  cross the ditch. even if they plunged headlong into it on all three fronts at once, the force of the  now powerful current would inevitably sweep them away. he had got quite a thrill out of the fight--a  pity it was already over.he rode along the eastern and southern sections of the ditch and found everything in order. he  reached the western section, opposite the tamarind wood, and here, contrary to the other battle  fronts, he found the enemy very busy indeed. the trunks and branches of the trees and the  creepers of the lianas, on the far bank of the ditch, fairly swarmed with industrious insects. but instead of eating the leaves there and then, they were merely gnawing through the stalks, so that a  thick green shower fell steadily to the ground.no doubt they were victualing columns sent out to obtain provender for the rest of the army. the  discovery did not surprise leiningen. he did not need to be told that ants are intelligent, that certain  species even use others as milch cows, watchdogs and slaves. he was well aware of their power of  adaptation, their sense of discipline, their marvelous talent for organization.his belief that a foray to supply the army was in progress was strengthened when he saw the  leaves that fell to the ground being dragged to the troops waiting outside the wood. then all at once  he realized the aim that rain of green was intended to serve.each single leaf, pulled or pushed by dozens of toiling insects, was borne straight to the edge of  the ditch. even as macbeth watched the approach of birnam wood in the hands of his enemies,  leiningen saw the tamarind wood move nearer and nearer in the mandibles of the ants. unlike the  fey scot, however, he did not lose his nerve; no witches had prophesied his doom, and if they had  he would have slept just as soundly. all the same, he was forced to admit to himself that the  situation was far more ominous than that of the day before.he had thought it impossible for the ants to build rafts for themselves--well, here they were, coming  in thousands, more than enough to bridge the ditch. leaves after leaves rustled down the slope into  the water, where the current drew them away from the bank and carried them into midstream. and  every single leaf carried several ants. this time the farmer did not trust to the alacrity of his  messengers. he galloped away, leaning from his saddle and yelling orders as he rushed past  outpost after outpost: "bring petrol pumps to the southwest front! issue spades to every man along  the line facing the wood!" and arrived at the eastern and southern sections, he dispatched every  man except the observation posts to the menaced west.then, as he rode past the stretch where the ants had failed to cross the day before, he witnessed a  brief but impressive scene. down the slope of the distant hill there came towards him a singular  being, writhing rather man running, an animal-like blackened statue with shapeless head and four  quivering feet that knuckled under almost ceaselessly. when the creature reached the far bank of  the ditch and collapsed opposite leiningen, he recognized it as a pampas stag, covered over and  over with ants.it had strayed near the zone of the army. as usual, they had attacked its eyes first. blinded, it had  reeled in the madness of hideous torment straight into the ranks of its persecutors, and now the  beast swayed to and fro in its death agony.with a shot from his rifle leiningen put it out of its misery. then he pulled out his watch. he hadn't  a second to lose, but for life itself he could not have denied his curiosity the satisfaction of knowing  how long the ants would take--for personal reasons, so to speak. after six minutes the white  polished bones alone remained. that's how he himself would look before you can--leiningen spat  once, and put spurs to his horse.the sporting zest with which the excitement of the novel contest had inspired him the day before  had now vanished; in its place was a cold and violent purpose. he would send these vermin back to  the hell where they belonged, somehow, anyhow. yes, but how was indeed the question; as things  stood at present it looked as if the devils would raze him and his men from the earth instead. he  had underestimated the might of the enemy; he really would have to bestir himself if he hoped to  outwit them.the biggest danger now, he decided, was the point where the western section of the ditch curved  southwards. and arrived there, he found his worst expectations justified. the very power of the  current had huddled the leaves and their crews of ants so close together at the bend that the bridge  was almost ready.true, streams of petrol and clumps of earth still prevented a landing. but the number of floating  leaves was increasing ever more swiftly. it could not be long now before a stretch of water a mile in  length was decked by a green pontoon over which the ants could rush in millions.leiningen galloped to the weir. the damming of the river was controlled by a wheel on its bank. the  planter ordered the man at the wheel first to lower the water in the ditch almost to vanishing point,  next to wait a moment, then suddenly to let the river in again. this maneuver of lowering and raising  the surface, of decreasing then increasing the flow of water through the ditch was to be repeated  over and over again until further notice.this tactic was at first successful. the water in the ditch sank, and with it the film of leaves. the  green fleet nearly reached the bed and the troops on the far bank swarmed down the slope to it.  then a violent flow of water at the original depth raced through the ditch, overwhelming leaves and  ants, and sweeping them along.this intermittent rapid flushing prevented just in time the almost completed fording of the ditch. but  it also flung here and there squads of the enemy vanguard simultaneously up the inner bank. these  seemed to know their duty only too well, and lost no time accomplishing it. the air rang with the  curses of bitten indians. they had removed their shirts and pants to detect the quicker the  upwards-hastening insects; when they saw one, they crushed it; and fortunately the onslaught as yet was only by skirmishers. again and again, the  water sank and rose, carrying leaves and drowned ants away with it. it lowered once more nearly to  its bed; but this time the exhausted defenders waited in vain for the flush of destruction. leiningen  sensed disaster; something must have gone wrong with the machinery of the dam. then a sweating  peon tore up to him--"they're over!"while the besieged were concentrating upon the defence of the stretch opposite the wood, the  seemingly unaffected line beyond the wood had become the theatre of decisive action. here the  defenders' front was sparse and scattered; everyone who could be spared had hurried away to the  south.just as the man at the weir had lowered the water almost to the bed of the ditch, the ants on a  wide front began another attempt at a direct crossing like that of the preceding day. into the  emptied bed poured an irresistible throng. rushing across the ditch, they attained the inner bank  before the slow-witted indians fully grasped the situation. their frantic screams dumfounded the  man at the weir. before he could direct the river anew into the safeguarding bed he saw himself  surrounded by raging ants. he ran like the others, ran for his life.when leiningen heard this, he knew the plantation was doomed. he wasted no time bemoaning  the inevitable. for as long as there was the slightest chance of success, he had stood his ground,  and now any further resistance was both useless and dangerous. he fired three revolver shots into  the air--the prearranged signal for his men to retreat instantly within the "inner moat." then he rode  towards the ranch house.this was two miles from the point of invasion. there was therefore time enough to prepare the  second line of defence against the advent of the ants. of the three great petrol cisterns near the  house, one had already been half emptied by the constant withdrawals needed for the pumps  during the fight at the water ditch. the remaining petrol in it was now drawn off through underground  pipes into the concrete trench which encircled the ranch house and its outbuildings.and there, drifting in twos and threes, leiningen's men reached him. most of them were obviously  trying to preserve an air of calm and indifference, belied, however, by their restless glances and  knitted brows. one could see their belief in a favorable outcome of the struggle was already  considerably shaken.the planter called his peons around him."well, lads," he began, "we've lost the first round. but we'll smash the beggars yet, don't you worry.  anyone who thinks otherwise can draw his pay here and now and push off. there are rafts enough  to spare on the river and plenty of time still to reach 'em."not a man stirred.leiningen acknowledged his silent vote of confidence with a laugh that was half a grunt. "that's the  stuff, lads. too bad if you'd missed the rest of the show, eh? well, the fun won't start till morning.  once these blighters turn tail, there'll be plenty of work for everyone and higher wages all round.   and now run along and get something to eat; you've earned it all right."in the excitement of the fight the greater part of the day had passed without the men once pausing  to snatch a bite. now that the ants were for the time being out of sight, and the "wall of petrol" gave  a stronger feeling of security, hungry stomachs began to assert their claims.the bridges over the concrete ditch were removed. here and there solitary ants had reached the  ditch; they gazed at the petrol meditatively, then scurried back again. apparently they had little  interest at the moment for what lay beyond the evil-reeking barrier; the abundant spoils of the  plantation were the main attraction. soon the trees, shrubs and beds for miles around were hulled  with ants zealously gobbling the yield of long weary months of strenuous toil.as twilight began to fall, a cordon of ants marched around the petrol trench, but as yet made no  move towards its brink. leiningen posted sentries with headlights and electric torches, then  withdrew to his office, and began to reckon up his losses. he estimated these as large, but, in  comparison with his bank balance, by no means unbearable. he worked out in some detail a  scheme of intensive cultivation which would enable him, before very long, to more than compensate  himself for the damage now being wrought to his crops. it was with a contented mind that he finally  betook himself to bed where he slept deeply until dawn, undisturbed by any thought that next day  little more might be left of him than a glistening skeleton.he rose with the sun and went out on the flat roof of his house. and a scene like one from dante  lay around him; for miles in every direction there was nothing but a black, glittering multitude, a  multitude of rested, sated, but none the less voracious ants: yes, look as far as one might, one  could see nothing but that rustling black throng, except in the north, where the great river drew a  boundary they could not hope to pass. but even the high stone breakwater, along the bank of the  river, which leiningen had built as a defence against inundations, was, like the paths, the shorn  trees and shrubs, the ground itself, black with ants.so their greed was not glutted in razing that vast plantation? not by a long shot; they were all the  more eager now on a rich and certain booty--four hundred men, numerous horses, and bursting  granaries.at first it seemed that the petrol trench would serve its purpose. the besiegers sensed the peril of  swimming it, and made no move to plunge blindly over its brink. instead they devised a better  maneuver; they began to collect shreds of bark, twigs and dried leaves and dropped these into the  petrol. everything green, which could have been similarly used, had long since been eaten. after a  time, though, a long procession could be seen bringing from the west the tamarind leaves used as  rafts the day before.since the petrol, unlike the water in the outer ditch, was perfectly still, the refuse stayed where it  was thrown. it was several hours before the ants succeeded in covering an appreciable part of the  surface. at length, however, they were ready to proceed to a direct attack.their storm troops swarmed down the concrete side, scrambled over the  supporting surface of twigs and leaves, and impelled these over the few remaining streaks of open  petrol until tlhey reached the other side. then they began to climb up this to make straight for the  helpless garrison.during the entire offensive, the planter sat peacefully, watching them with interest, but not stirring a  muscle. moreover, he had ordered his men not to disturb in any way whatever the advancing horde.  so they squatted listlessly along the bank of the ditch and waited for a sign from the boss.   the petrol was now covered with ants. a few had climbed the inner concrete wall and were  scurrying towards the defenders."everyone back from the ditch!" roared leiningen. the men rushed away, without the slightest idea  of his plan. he stooped forward and cautiously dropped into the ditch a stone which split the floating  carpet and its living freight, to reveal a gleaming patch of petrol. a match spurted, sank down to the  oily surface--leiningen sprang back; in a flash a towering rampart of fire encompassed the garrison.this spectacular and instant repulse threw the indians into ecstasy. they applauded, yelled and  stamped, like children at a pantomime. had it not been for the awe in which they held the boss,  they would infallibly have carried him shoulder high.it was some time before the petrol burned down to the bed of the ditch, and the wall of smoke and  flame began to lower. the ants had retreated in a wide circle from the devastation, and innumerable  charred fragments along the outer bank showed that the flames had spread from the holocaust in  the ditch well into the ranks beyond, where they had wrought havoc far and wide.yet the perseverance of the ants was by no means broken; indeed, each setback seemed only to  whet it. the concrete cooled, the flicker of the dying flames wavered and vanished, petrol from the  second tank poured into the trench--and the ants marched forward anew to the attack.the foregoing scene repeated itself in every detail, except that on this occasion less time was  needed to bridge the ditch, for the petrol was now already filmed by a layer of ash. once again they  withdrew; once again petrol flowed into the ditch. would the creatures never learn that their  self-sacrifice was utterly senseless? it really was senseless, wasn't it? yes, of course it was  senseless--provided the defenders had an unlimited supply of petrol.when leiningen reached this stage of reasoning, he felt for the first time since the arrival of the  ants that his confidence was deserting him. his skin began to creep; he loosened his collar. once  the devils were over the trench there wasn't a chance in hell for him and his men. god, what a  prospect, to be eaten alive like that!for the third time the flames immolated the attacking troops, and burned down to extinction. yet  the ants were coming on again as if nothing had happened. and meanwhile leiningen had made a  discovery that chilled him to the bone-petrol was no longer flowing into the ditch. something must  be blocking the outflow pipe of the third and last cistern-a snake or a dead rat? whatever it was,  the ants could be held off no longer, unless petrol could by some method be led from the cistern  into the ditch.then leiningen remembered that in an outhouse nearby were two old disused fire engines. spry as  never before in their lives, the peons dragged them out of the shed, connected their pumps to the  cistern, uncoiled and laid the hose. they were just in time to aim a stream of petrol at a column of  ants that had already crossed and drive them back down the incline into the ditch. once more an  oily girdle surrounded the garrison, once more it was possible to hold the position--for the moment.it was obvious, however, that this last resource meant only the postponement of defeat and death.  a few of the peons fell on their knees and began to pray; others, shrieking insanely, fired their  revolvers at the black, advancing masses, as if they felt their despair was pitiful enough to sway  fate itself to mercy.at length, two of the men's nerves broke: leiningen saw a naked indian leap over the north side of  the petrol trench, quickly followed by a second. they sprinted with incredible speed towards the  river. but their fleetness did not save them; long before they could attain the rafts, the enemy  covered their bodies from head to foot.in the agony of their torment, both sprang blindly into the wide river, where enemies no less sinister  awaited them. wild screams of mortal anguish informed the breathless onlookers that crocodiles  and sword-toothed piranhas were no less ravenous than ants, and even nimbler in reaching their  prey.in spite of this bloody warning, more and more men showed they were making up their minds to run  the blockade. anything, even a fight midstream against alligators, seemed better than powerlessly  waiting for death to come and slowly consume their living bodies.leiningen flogged his brain till it reeled. was there nothing on earth could sweep this devil's spawn  back into the hell from which it came?then out of the inferno of his bewilderment rose a terrifying inspiration. yes, one hope remained,  and one alone. it might be possible to dam the great river completely, so that its waters would fill  not only the water ditch but overflow into the entire gigantic "saucer" of land in which lay the  plantation.the far bank of the river was too high for the waters to escape that way. the stone breakwater ran  between the river and the plantation; its only gaps occurred where the "horseshoe" ends of the  water ditch passed into the river. so its waters would not only be forced to inundate into the  plantation, they would also be held there by the breakwater until they rose to its own high level. in  half an hour, perhaps even earlier, the plantation and its hostile army of occupation would be  flooded.the ranch house and outbuildings stood upon rising ground. their foundations were higher than the  breakwater, so the flood would not reach them. and any remaining ants trying to ascend the slope  could be repulsed by petrol.it was possible--yes, if one could only get to the dam! a distance of nearly two miles lay between  the ranch house and the weir--two miles of ants. those two peons had managed only a fifth of that  distance at the cost of their lives. was there an indian daring enough after that to run the gauntlet five times as far?  hardly likely; and if there were, his prospect of getting back was almost nil.no, there was only one thing for it, he'd have to make the attempt himself; he might just as well be  running as sitting still, anyway, when the ants finally got him. besides, there was a bit of a chance.  perhaps the ants weren't so almighty, after all; perhaps he had allowed the mass suggestion of that  evil black throng to hypnotize him, just as a snake fascinates and overpowers.the ants were building their bridges. leiningen got up on a chair. "hey, lads, listen to me!" he  cried. slowly and listlessly, from all sides of the trench, the men began to shuffle towards him, the  apathy of death already stamped on their faces."listen, lads!" he shouted. "you're frightened of those beggars, but you're a damn sight more  frightened of me, and i'm proud of you. there's still a chance to save our lives--by flooding the  plantation from the river. now one of you might manage to get as far as the weir--but he'd never  come back. well, i'm not going to let you try it; if i did i'd be worse than one of those ants. no, i  called the tune, and now i'm going to pay the piper."the moment i'm over the ditch, set fire to the petrol. that'll allow time for the flood to do the trick.  then all you have to do is wait here all snug and quiet till i'm back. yes, i'm coming back, trust  me"--he grinned--"when i've finished my slimming-cure."he pulled on high leather boots, drew heavy gauntlets over his hands, and stuffed the spaces  between breeches and boots, gauntlets and arms, shirt and neck, with rags soaked in petrol. with  close-fitting mosquito goggles he shielded his eyes, knowing too well the ants' dodge of first  robbing their victim of sight. finally, he plugged his nostrils and ears with cotton-wool, and let the  peons drench his clothes with petrol.he was about to set off, when the old indian medicine man came up to him; he had a wondrous  salve, he said, prepared from a species of chafer whose odor was intolerable to ants. yes, this odor  protected these chafers from the attacks of even the most murderous ants. the indian smeared the  boss' boots, his gauntlets, and his face over and over with the extract.leiningen then remembered the paralyzing effect of ants' venom, and the indian gave him a gourd  full of the medicine he had administered to the bitten peon at the water ditch. the planter drank it  down without noticing its bitter taste; his mind was already at the weir.he started of towards the northwest corner of the trench. with a bound he was over--and among the  ants.the beleaguered garrison had no opportunity to watch leiningen's race against death. the ants  were climbing the inner bank again-the lurid ring of petrol blazed aloft. for the fourth time that day  the reflection from the fire shone on the sweating faces of the imprisoned men, and on the  reddish-black cuirasses of their oppressors. the red and blue, dark-edged flames leaped vividly  now, celebrating what? the funeral pyre of the four hundred, or of the hosts of destruction?  leiningen ran. he ran in long, equal strides, with only one thought, one sensation, in his being--he  must get through. he dodged all trees and shrubs; except for the split seconds his soles touched  the ground the ants should have no opportunity to alight on him. that they would get to him soon,  despite the salve on his boots, the petrol in his clothes, he realized only too well, but he knew even  more surely that he must, and that he would, get to the weir.apparently the salve was some use after all; not until he reached halfway did he feel ants under his  clothes, and a few on his face. mechanically, in his stride, he struck at them, scarcely conscious  of their bites. he saw he was drawing appreciably nearer the weir--the distance grew less and  less--sank to five hundred--three--two--one hundred yards.then he was at the weir and gripping the ant-hulled wheel. hardly had he seized it when a horde of  infuriated ants flowed over his hands, arms and shoulders. he started the wheel--before it turned  once on its axis the swarm covered his face. leiningen strained like a madman, his lips pressed  tight; if he opened them to draw breath. . . .he turned and turned; slowly the dam lowered until it reached the bed of the river. already the water  was overflowing the ditch. another minute, and the river was pouring through the near-by gap in the  breakwater. the flooding of the plantation had begun.leiningen let go the wheel. now, for the first time, he realized he was coated from head to foot with  a layer of ants. in spite of the petrol his clothes were full of them, several had got to his body or  were clinging to his face. now that he had completed his task, he felt the smart raging over his  flesh from the bites of sawing and piercing insects.frantic with pain, he almost plunged into the river. to be ripped and  splashed to shreds by  paranhas? already he was running the return journey, knocking ants from his gloves and jacket,  brushing them from his bloodied face, squashing them to death under his clothes.one of the creatures bit him just below the rim of his goggles; he managed to tear it away, but the  agony of the bite and its etching acid drilled into the eye nerves; he saw now through circles of fire  into a milky mist, then he ran for a time almost blinded, knowing that if he once tripped and fell....  the old indian's brew didn't seem much good; it weakened the poison a bit, but didn't get rid of it.  his heart pounded as if it would burst; blood roared in his ears; a giant's fist battered his lungs.then he could see again, but the burning girdle of petrol appeared infinitely far away; he could not  last half that distance. swift-changing pictures flashed through his head, episodes in his life, while  in another part of his brain a cool and impartial onlooker informed this ant-blurred, gasping,  exhausted bundle named leiningen that such a rushing panorama of scenes from one's past is  seen only in the moment before death.a stone in the path . . . to weak to avoid it . . . the planter stumbled and collapsed. he tried to rise .  . . he must be pinned under a rock . . . it was impossible . . . the slightest movement was  impossible . . . .then all at once he saw, starkly clear and huge, and, right before his  eyes, furred with ants, towering and swaying in its death agony, the pampas stag. in six  minutes--gnawed to the bones. god, he couldn't die like that! and something outside him seemed  to drag him to his feet. he tottered. he began to stagger forward again.through the blazing ring hurtled an apparition which, as soon as it reached the ground on the inner  side, fell full length and did not move. leiningen, at the moment he made that leap through the  flames, lost consciousness for the first time in his life. as he lay there, with glazing eyes and  lacerated face, he appeared a man returned from the grave. the peons rushed to him, stripped off  his clothes, tore away the ants from a body that seemed almost one open wound; in some paces  the bones were showing. they carried him into the ranch house.as the curtain of flames lowered, one could see in place of the illimitable host of ants an extensive  vista of water. the thwarted river had swept over the plantation, carrying with it the entire army. the  water had collected and mounted in the great "saucer," while the ants had in vain attempted to  reach the hill on which stood the ranch house. the girdle of flames held them back.and so imprisoned between water and fire, they had been delivered into the annihilation that was  their god. and near the farther mouth of the water ditch, where the stone mole had its second gap,  the ocean swept the lost battalions into the river, to vanish forever.the ring of fire dwindled as the water mounted to the petrol trench, and quenched the dimming  flames. the inundation rose higher and higher: because its outflow was impeded by the timber and  underbrush it had carried along with it, its surface required some time to reach the top of the high  stone breakwater and discharge over it the rest of the shattered army.it swelled over ant-stippled shrubs and bushes, until it washed against the foot of the knoll whereon  the besieged had taken refuge. for a while an alluvial of ants tried again and again to attain this dry  land, only to be repulsed by streams of petrol back into the merciless flood.leiningen lay on his bed, his body swathed from head to foot in bandages. with fomentations and  salves, they had managed to stop the bleeding, and had dressed his many wounds. now they  thronged around him, one question in every face. would he recover? "he won't die," said the old  man who had bandaged him, "if he doesn't want to.''the planter opened his eyes. "everything in order?'' he asked."they're gone,'' said his nurse. "to hell." he held out to his master a gourd full of a powerful  sleeping draught. leiningen gulped it down."i told you i'd come back," he murmured, "even if i am a bit streamlined." he grinned and shut his  eyes. he slept."yes," said the dealer, "our windfalls are of various kinds. some customers are ignorant, and then i touch a dividend on my superior knowledge. some are dishonest," and here he held up the candle, so that the light fell strongly on his visitor, "and in that case," he continued, "i profit by my virtue."markheim had but just entered from the daylight streets, and his eyes had not yet grown familiar with the mingled shine and darkness in the shop. at these pointed words, and before the near presence of the flame, he blinked painfully and looked aside.the dealer chuckled. "you come to me on christmas day," he resumed, "when you know that i am alone in my house, put up my shutters, and make a point of refusing business. well, you will have to pay for that; you will have to pay for my loss of time, when i should be balancing my books; you will have to pay, besides, for a kind of manner that i remark in you to-day very strongly. i am the essence of discretion, and ask no awkward questions; but when a customer cannot look me in the eye, he has to pay for it." the dealer once more chuckled; and then, changing to his usual business voice, though still with a note of irony, "you can give, as usual, a clear account of how you came into the possession of the object?" he continued. "still your uncle's cabinet? a remarkable collector, sir!"and the little pale, round-shouldered dealer stood almost on tip-toe, looking over the top of his gold spectacles, and nodding his head with every mark of disbelief. markheim returned his gaze with one of infinite pity, and a touch of horror."this time," said he, "you are in error. i have not come to sell, but to buy. i have no curios to dispose of; my uncle's cabinet is bare to the wainscot; even were it still intact, i have done well on the stock exchange, and should more likely add to it than otherwise, and my errand to-day is simplicity itself. i seek a christmas present for a lady," he continued, waxing more fluent as he struck into the speech he had prepared; "and certainly i owe you every excuse for thus disturbing you upon so small a matter. but the thing was neglected yesterday; i must produce my little compliment at dinner; and, as you very well know, a rich marriage is not a thing to be neglected."there followed a pause, during which the dealer seemed to weigh this statement incredulously. the ticking of many clocks among the curious lumber of the shop, and the faint rushing of the cabs in a near thoroughfare, filled up the interval of silence."well, sir," said the dealer, "be it so. you are an old customer after all; and if, as you say, you have the chance of a good marriage, far be it from me to be an obstacle. here is a nice thing for a lady now," he went on, "this hand-glass--fifteenth century, warranted; comes from a good collection, too; but i reserve the name, in the interests of my customer, who was just like yourself, my dear sir, the nephew and sole heir of a remarkable collector."the dealer, while he thus ran on in his dry and biting voice, had stooped to take the object from its place; and, as he had done so, a shock had passed through markheim, a start both of hand and foot, a sudden leap of many tumultuous passions to the face. it passed as swiftly as it came, and left no trace beyond a certain trembling of the hand that now received the glass."a glass," he said hoarsely, and then paused, and repeated it more clearly. "a glass? for christmas? surely not?""and why not?" cried the dealer. "why not a glass?"markheim was looking upon him with an indefinable expression. "you ask me why not?" he said. "why, look here--look in it--look at yourself! do you like to see it? no! nor i--nor any man."the little man had jumped back when markheim had so suddenly confronted him with the mirror; but now, perceiving there was nothing worse on hand, he chuckled. "your future lady, sir, must be pretty hard favoured," said he."i ask you," said markheim, "for a christmas present, and you give me this--this damned reminder of years, and sins and follies--this hand- conscience! did you mean it? had you a thought in your mind? tell me. it will be better for you if you do. come, tell me about yourself. i hazard a guess now, that you are in secret a very charitable man."the dealer looked closely at his companion. it was very odd, markheim did not appear to be laughing; there was something in his face like an eager sparkle of hope, but nothing of mirth."what are you driving at?" the dealer asked."not charitable?" returned the other, gloomily. "not charitable; not pious; not scrupulous; unloving, unbeloved; a hand to get money, a safe to keep it. is that all? dear god, man, is that all?""i will tell you what it is," began the dealer, with some sharpness, and then broke off again into a chuckle. "but i see this is a love match of yours, and you have been drinking the lady's health.""ah!" cried markheim, with a strange curiosity. "ah, have you been in love? tell me about that.""i," cried the dealer. "i in love! i never had the time, nor have i the time to-day for all this nonsense. will you take the glass?""where is the hurry?" returned markheim. "it is very pleasant to stand here talking; and life is so short and insecure that i would not hurry away from any pleasure--no, not even from so mild a one as this. we should rather cling, cling to what little we can get, like a man at a cliff's edge. every second is a cliff, if you think upon it--a cliff a mile high--high enough, if we fall, to dash us out of every feature of humanity. hence it is best to talk pleasantly. let us talk of each other; why should we wear this mask? let us be confidential. who knows? we might become friends.""i have just one word to say to you," said the dealer. "either make your purchase, or walk out of my shop.""true, true," said markheim. "enough fooling. to business. show me something else."the dealer stooped once more, this time to replace the glass upon the shelf, his thin blond hair falling over his eyes as he did so. markheim moved a little nearer, with one hand in the pocket of his greatcoat; he drew himself up and filled his lungs; at the same time many different emotions were depicted together on his face--terror, horror, and resolve, fascination and a physical repulsion; and through a haggard lift of his upper lip, his teeth looked out."this, perhaps, may suit," observed the dealer. and then, as he began to rearise, markheim bounded from behind upon his victim. the long, skewer-like dagger flashed and fell. the dealer struggled like a hen, striking his temple on the shelf, and then tumbled on the floor in a heap.time had some score of small voices in that shop--some stately and slow as was becoming to their great age; others garrulous and hurried. all these told out the seconds in an intricate chorus of tickings. then the passage of a lad's feet, heavily running on the pavement, broke in upon these smaller voices and startled markheim into the consciousness of his surroundings. he looked about him awfully. the candle stood on the counter, its flame solemnly wagging in a draught; and by that inconsiderable movement the whole room was filled with noiseless bustle and kept heaving like a sea: the tall shadows nodding, the gross blots of darkness swelling and dwindling as with respiration, the faces of the portraits and the china gods changing and wavering like images in water. the inner door stood ajar, and peered into that leaguer of shadows with a long slit of daylight like a pointing finger.from these fear-stricken rovings, markheim's eyes returned to the body of his victim, where it lay, both humped and sprawling, incredibly small and strangely meaner than in life. in these poor, miserly clothes, in that ungainly attitude, the dealer lay like so much sawdust. markheim had feared to see it, and, lo! it was nothing. and yet, as he gazed, this bundle of old clothes and pool of blood began to find eloquent voices. there it must lie; there was none to work the cunning hinges or direct the miracle of locomotion; there it must lie till it was found. found! ay, and then? then would this dead flesh lift up a cry that would ring over england, and fill the world with the echoes of pursuit. ay, dead or not, this was still the enemy. "time was that when the brains were out," he thought; and the first word struck into his mind. time, now that the deed was accomplished-- time, which had closed for the victim, had become instant and momentous for the slayer.the thought was yet in his mind, when, first one and then another, with every variety of pace and voice--one deep as the bell from a cathedral turret, another ringing on its treble notes the prelude of a waltz,--the clocks began to strike the hour of three in the afternoon.the sudden outbreak of so many tongues in that dumb chamber staggered him. he began to bestir himself, going to and fro with the candle, beleaguered by moving shadows, and startled to the soul by chance reflections. in many rich mirrors, some of home design, some from venice or amsterdam, he saw his face repeated and repeated, as it were an army of spies; his own eyes met and detected him; and the sound of his own steps, lightly as they fell, vexed the surrounding quiet. and still, as he continued to fill his pockets, his mind accused him with a sickening iteration, of the thousand faults of his design. he should have chosen a more quiet hour; he should have prepared an alibi; he should not have used a knife; he should have been more cautious, and only bound and gagged the dealer, and not killed him; he should have been more bold, and killed the servant also; he should have done all things otherwise. poignant regrets, weary, incessant toiling of the mind to change what was unchangeable, to plan what was now useless, to be the architect of the irrevocable past. meanwhile, and behind all this activity, brute terrors, like the scurrying of rats in a deserted attic, filled the more remote chambers of his brain with riot; the hand of the constable would fall heavy on his shoulder, and his nerves would jerk like a hooked fish; or he beheld, in galloping defile, the dock, the prison, the gallows, and the black coffin.terror of the people in the street sat down before his mind like a besieging army. it was impossible, he thought, but that some rumour of the struggle must have reached their ears and set on edge their curiosity; and now, in all the neighbouring houses, he divined them sitting motionless and with uplifted ear--solitary people, condemned to spend christmas dwelling alone on memories of the past, and now startingly recalled from that tender exercise; happy family parties struck into silence round the table, the mother still with raised finger--every degree and age and humour, but all, by their own hearths, prying and hearkening and weaving the rope that was to hang him. sometimes it seemed to him he could not move too softly; the clink of the tall bohemian goblets rang out loudly like a bell; and alarmed by the bigness of the ticking, he was tempted to stop the clocks. and then, again, with a swift transition of his terrors, the very silence of the place appeared a source of peril, and a thing to strike and freeze the passer-by; and he would step more boldly, and bustle aloud among the contents of the shop, and imitate, with elaborate bravado, the movements of a busy man at ease in his own house.but he was now so pulled about by different alarms that, while one portion of his mind was still alert and cunning, another trembled on the brink of lunacy. one hallucination in particular took a strong hold on his credulity. the neighbour hearkening with white face beside his window, the passer-by arrested by a horrible surmise on the pavement--these could at worst suspect, they could not know; through the brick walls and shuttered windows only sounds could penetrate. but here, within the house, was he alone? he knew he was; he had watched the servant set forth sweet-hearting, in her poor best, "out for the day" written in every ribbon and smile. yes, he was alone, of course; and yet, in the bulk of empty house above him, he could surely hear a stir of delicate footing; he was surely conscious, inexplicably conscious of some presence. ay, surely; to every room and corner of the house his imagination followed it; and now it was a faceless thing, and yet had eyes to see with; and again it was a shadow of himself; and yet again behold the image of the dead dealer, reinspired with cunning and hatred.at times, with a strong effort, he would glance at the open door which still seemed to repel his eyes. the house was tall, the skylight small and dirty, the day blind with fog; and the light that filtered down to the ground story was exceedingly faint, and showed dimly on the threshold of the shop. and yet, in that strip of doubtful brightness, did there not hang wavering a shadow?suddenly, from the street outside, a very jovial gentleman began to beat with a staff on the shop door, accompanying his blows with shouts and railleries in which the dealer was continually called upon by name. markheim, smitten into ice, glanced at the dead man. but no! he lay quite still; he was fled away far beyond earshot of these blows and shoutings; he was sunk beneath seas of silence; and his name, which would once have caught his notice above the howling of a storm, had become an empty sound. and presently the jovial gentleman desisted from his knocking and departed.here was a broad hint to hurry what remained to be done, to get forth from this accusing neighbourhood, to plunge into a bath of london multitudes, and to reach, on the other side of day, that haven of safety and apparent innocence--his bed. one visitor had come; at any moment another might follow and be more obstinate. to have done the deed, and yet not to reap the profit, would be too abhorrent a failure. the money--that was now markheim's concern; and as a means to that, the keys.he glanced over his shoulder at the open door, where the shadow was still lingering and shivering; and with no conscious repugnance of the mind, yet with a tremor of the belly, he drew near the body of his victim. the human character had quite departed. like a suit half- stuffed with bran, the limbs lay scattered, the trunk doubled, on the floor; and yet the thing repelled him. although so dingy and inconsiderable to the eye, he feared it might have more significance to the touch. he took the body by the shoulders, and turned it on its back. it was strangely light and supple, and the limbs, as if they had been broken, fell into the oddest postures. the face was robbed of all expression; but it was as pale as wax, and shockingly smeared with blood about one temple. that was, for markheim, the one displeasing circumstance. it carried him back, upon the instant, to a certain fair-day in a fishers' village: a gray day, a piping wind, a crowd upon the street, the blare of brasses, the booming of drums, the nasal voice of a ballad singer; and a boy going to and fro, buried overhead in the crowd and divided between interest and fear, until, coming out upon the chief place of concourse, he beheld a booth and a great screen with pictures, dismally designed, garishly coloured--brownrigg with her apprentice, the mannings with their murdered guest, weare in the death-grip of thurtell, and a score besides of famous crimes. the thing was as clear as an illusion he was once again that little boy; he was looking once again, and with the same sense of physical revolt, at these vile pictures; he was still stunned by the thumping of the drums. a bar of that day's music returned upon his memory; and at that, for the first time, a qualm came over him, a breath of nausea, a sudden weakness of the joints, which he must instantly resist and conquer.he judged it more prudent to confront than to flee from these considerations, looking the more hardily in the dead face, bending his mind to realise the nature and greatness of his crime. so little a while ago that face had moved with every change of sentiment, that pale mouth had spoken, that body had been all on fire with governable energies; and now, and by his act, that piece of life had been arrested, as the horologist, with interjected finger, arrests the beating of the clock. so he reasoned in vain; he could rise to no more remorseful consciousness; the same heart which had shuddered before the painted effigies of crime, looked on its reality unmoved. at best, he felt a gleam of pity for one who had been endowed in vain with all those faculties that can make the world a garden of enchantment, one who had never lived and who was now dead. but of penitence, no, not a tremor.with that, shaking himself clear of these considerations, he found the keys and advanced toward the open door of the shop. outside, it had begun to rain smartly, and the sound of the shower upon the roof had banished silence. like some dripping cavern, the chambers of the house were haunted by an incessant echoing, which filled the ear and mingled with the ticking of the clocks. and, as markheim approached the door, he seemed to hear, in answer to his own cautious tread, the steps of another foot withdrawing up the stair. the shadow still palpitated loosely on the threshold. he threw a ton's weight of resolve upon his muscles, and drew back the door.the faint, foggy daylight glimmered dimly on the bare floor and stairs; on the bright suit of armour posted, halbert in hand, upon the landing; and on the dark wood-carvings, and framed pictures that hung against the yellow panels of the wainscot. so loud was the beating of the rain through all the house that, in markheim's ears, it began to be distinguished into many different sounds. footsteps and sighs, the tread of regiments marching in the distance, the chink of money in the counting, and the creaking of doors held stealthily ajar, appeared to mingle with the patter of the drops upon the cupola and the gushing of the water in the pipes. the sense that he was not alone grew upon him to the verge of madness. on every side he was haunted and begirt by presences. he heard them moving in the upper chambers; from the shop, he heard the dead man getting to his legs; and as he began with a great effort to mount the stairs, feet fled quietly before him and followed stealthily behind. if he were but deaf, he thought, how tranquilly he would possess his soul! and then again, and hearkening with ever fresh attention, he blessed himself for that unresting sense which held the outposts and stood a trusty sentinel upon his life. his head turned continually on his neck; his eyes, which seemed starting from their orbits, scouted on every side, and on every side were half rewarded as with the tail of something nameless vanishing. the four and twenty steps to the first floor were four and twenty agonies.on that first story, the doors stood ajar--three of them, like three ambushes, shaking his nerves like the throats of cannon. he could never again, he felt, be sufficiently immured and fortified from men's observing eyes; he longed to be home, girt in by walls, buried among bedclothes, and invisible to all but god. and at that thought he wondered a little, recollecting tales of other murderers and the fear they were said to entertain of heavenly avengers. it was not so, at least, with him. he feared the laws of nature, lest, in their callous and immutable procedure, they should preserve some damning evidence of his crime. he feared tenfold more, with a slavish, superstitious terror, some scission in the continuity of man's experience, some wilful illegality of nature. he played a game of skill, depending on the rules, calculating consequence from cause; and what if nature, as the defeated tyrant overthrew the chess-board, should break the mould of their succession? the like had befallen napoleon (so writers said) when the winter changed the time of its appearance. the like might befall markheim: the solid walls might become transparent and reveal his doings like those of bees in a glass hive; the stout planks might yield under his foot like quicksands and detain him in their clutch. ay, and there were soberer accidents that might destroy him; if, for instance, the house should fall and imprison him beside the body of his victim, or the house next door should fly on fire, and the firemen invade him from all sides. these things he feared; and, in a sense, these things might be called the hands of god reached forth against sin. but about god himself he was at ease; his act was doubtless exceptional, but so were his excuses, which god knew; it was there, and not among men, that he felt sure of justice.when he had got safe into the drawing-room, and shut the door behind him, he was aware of a respite from alarms. the room was quite dismantled, uncarpeted besides, and strewn with packing-cases and incongruous furniture; several great pier-glasses, in which he beheld himself at various angles, like an actor on a stage; many pictures, framed and unframed, standing, with their faces to the wall; a fine sheraton sideboard, a cabinet of marquetry, and a great old bed, with tapestry hangings. the windows opened to the floor; but by great good fortune the lower part of the shutters had been closed, and this concealed him from the neighbours. here, then, markheim drew in a packing-case before the cabinet, and began to search among the keys. it was a long business, for there were many; and it was irksome, besides; for, after all, there might be nothing in the cabinet, and time was on the wing. but the closeness of the occupation sobered him. with the tail of his eye he saw the door--even glanced at it from time to time directly, like a besieged commander pleased to verify the good estate of his defences. but in truth he was at peace. the rain falling in the street sounded natural and pleasant. presently, on the other side, the notes of a piano were wakened to the music of a hymn, and the voices of many children took up the air and words. how stately, how comfortable was the melody! how fresh the youthful voices! markheim gave ear to it smilingly, as he sorted out the keys; and his mind was thronged with answerable ideas and images: church-going children, and the pealing of the high organ; children afield, bathers by the brookside, ramblers on the brambly common, kite-flyers in the windy and cloud-navigated sky; and then, at another cadence of the hymn, back again to church, and the somnolence of summer sundays, and the high genteel voice of the parson (which he smiled a little to recall) and the painted jacobean tombs, and the dim lettering of the ten commandments in the chancel.and as he sat thus, at once busy and absent, he was startled to his feet. a flash of ice, a flash of fire, a bursting gush of blood, went over him, and then he stood transfixed and thrilling. a step mounted the stair slowly and steadily, and presently a hand was laid upon the knob, and the lock clicked, and the door opened.fear held markheim in a vice. what to expect he knew not--whether the dead man walking, or the official ministers of human justice, or some chance witness blindly stumbling in to consign him to the gallows. but when a face was thrust into the aperture, glanced round the room, looked at him, nodded and smiled as if in friendly recognition, and then withdrew again, and the door closed behind it, his fear broke loose from his control in a hoarse cry. at the sound of this the visitant returned."did you call me?" he asked, pleasantly, and with that he entered the room and closed the door behind him.markheim stood and gazed at him with all his eyes. perhaps there was a film upon his sight, but the outlines of the new comer seemed to change and waver like those of the idols in the wavering candle-light of the shop; and at times he thought he knew him; and at times he thought he bore a likeness to himself; and always, like a lump of living terror, there lay in his bosom the conviction that this thing was not of the earth and not of god.and yet the creature had a strange air of the commonplace, as he stood looking on markheim with a smile; and when he added, "you are looking for the money, i believe?" it was in the tones of everyday politeness.markheim made no answer."i should warn you," resumed the other, "that the maid has left her sweetheart earlier than usual and will soon be here. if mr. markheim be found in this house, i need not describe to him the consequences.""you know me?" cried the murderer.the visitor smiled. "you have long been a favourite of mine," he said; "and i have long observed and often sought to help you.""what are you?" cried markheim; "the devil?""what i may be," returned the other, "cannot affect the service i propose to render you.""it can," cried markheim; "it does! be helped by you? no, never; not by you! you do not know me yet; thank god, you do not know me!""i know you," replied the visitant, with a sort of kind severity or rather firmness. "i know you to the soul.""know me!" cried markheim. "who can do so? my life is but a travesty and slander on myself. i have lived to belie my nature. all men do; all men are better than this disguise that grows about and stifles them. you see each dragged away by life, like one whom bravos have seized and muffled in a cloak. if they had their own control--if you could see their faces, they would be altogether different, they would shine out for heroes and saints! i am worse than most; myself is more overlaid; my excuse is known to me and god. but, had i the time, i could disclose myself.""to me?" inquired the visitant."to you before all," returned the murderer. "i supposed you were intelligent. i thought--since you exist--you would prove a reader of the heart. and yet you would propose to judge me by my acts! think of it--my acts! i was born and i have lived in a land of giants; giants have dragged me by the wrists since i was born out of my mother--the giants of circumstance. and you would judge me by my acts! but can you not look within? can you not understand that evil is hateful to me? can you not see within me the clear writing of conscience, never blurred by any wilful sophistry, although too often disregarded? can you not read me for a thing that surely must be common as humanity-- the unwilling sinner?""all this is very feelingly expressed," was the reply, "but it regards me not. these points of consistency are beyond my province, and i care not in the least by what compulsion you may have been dragged away, so as you are but carried in the right direction. but time flies; the servant delays, looking in the faces of the crowd and at the pictures on the hoardings, but still she keeps moving nearer; and remember, it is as if the gallows itself was striding towards you through the christmas streets! shall i help you--i, who know all? shall i tell you where to find the money?""for what price?" asked markheim."i offer you the service for a christmas gift," returned the other.markheim could not refrain from smiling with a kind of bitter triumph. "no," said he, "i will take nothing at your hands; if i were dying of thirst, and it was your hand that put the pitcher to my lips, i should find the courage to refuse. it may be credulous, but i will do nothing to commit myself to evil.""i have no objection to a death-bed repentance," observed the visitant."because you disbelieve their efficacy!" markheim cried."i do not say so," returned the other; "but i look on these things from a different side, and when the life is done my interest falls. the man has lived to serve me, to spread black looks under colour of religion, or to sow tares in the wheat-field, as you do, in a course of weak compliance with desire. now that he draws so near to his deliverance, he can add but one act of service: to repent, to die smiling, and thus to build up in confidence and hope the more timorous of my surviving followers. i am not so hard a master. try me; accept my help. please yourself in life as you have done hitherto; please yourself more amply, spread your elbows at the board; and when the night begins to fall and the curtains to be drawn, i tell you, for your greater comfort, that you will find it even easy to compound your quarrel with your conscience, and to make a truckling peace with god. i came but now from such a death-bed, and the room was full of sincere mourners, listening to the man's last words; and when i looked into that face, which had been set as a flint against mercy, i found it smiling with hope.""and do you, then, suppose me such a creature?" asked markheim. "do you think i have no more generous aspirations than to sin and sin and sin and at last sneak into heaven? my heart rises at the thought. is this, then, your experience of mankind? or is it because you find me with red hands that you presume such baseness? and is this crime of murder indeed so impious as to dry up the very springs of good?""murder is to me no special category," replied the other. "all sins are murder, even as all life is war. i behold your race, like starving mariners on a raft, plucking crusts out of the hands of famine and feeding on each other's lives. i follow sins beyond the moment of their acting; i find in all that the last consequence is death, and to my eyes, the pretty maid who thwarts her mother with such taking graces on a question of a ball, drips no less visibly with human gore than such a murderer as yourself. do i say that i follow sins? i follow virtues also. they differ not by the thickness of a nail; they are both scythes for the reaping angel of death. evil, for which i live, consists not in action but in character. the bad man is dear to me, not the bad act, whose fruits, if we could follow them far enough down the hurtling cataract of the ages, might yet be found more blessed than those of the rarest virtues. and it is not because you have killed a dealer, but because you are markheim, that i offer to forward your escape.""i will lay my heart open to you," answered markheim. "this crime on which you find me is my last. on my way to it i have learned many lessons; itself is a lesson--a momentous lesson. hitherto i have been driven with revolt to what i would not; i was a bond-slave to poverty, driven and scourged. there are robust virtues that can stand in these temptations; mine was not so; i had a thirst of pleasure. but to-day, and out of this deed, i pluck both warning and riches--both the power and a fresh resolve to be myself. i become in all things a free actor in the world; i begin to see myself all changed, these hands the agents of good, this heart at peace. something comes over me out of the past--something of what i have dreamed on sabbath evenings to the sound of the church organ, of what i forecast when i shed tears over noble books, or talked, an innocent child, with my mother. there lies my life; i have wandered a few years, but now i see once more my city of destination.""you are to use this money on the stock exchange, i think?" remarked the visitor; "and there, if i mistake not, you have already lost some thousands?""ah," said markheim, "but this time i have a sure thing.""this time, again, you will lose," replied the visitor quietly."ah, but i keep back the half!" cried markheim."that also you will lose," said the other.the sweat started upon markheim's brow. "well then, what matter?" he exclaimed. "say it be lost, say i am plunged again in poverty, shall one part of me, and that the worse, continue until the end to override the better? evil and good run strong in me, hailing me both ways. i do not love the one thing; i love all. i can conceive great deeds, renunciations, martyrdoms; and though i be fallen to such a crime as murder, pity is no stranger to my thoughts. i pity the poor; who knows their trials better than myself? i pity and help them. i prize love; i love honest laughter; there is no good thing nor true thing on earth but i love it from my heart. and are my vices only to direct my life, and my virtues to lie without effect, like some passive lumber of the mind? not so; good, also, is a spring of acts."but the visitant raised his finger. "for six and thirty years that you have been in this world," said he, "through many changes of fortune and varieties of humour, i have watched you steadily fall. fifteen years ago you would have started at a theft. three years back you would have blenched at the name of murder. is there any crime, is there any cruelty or meanness, from which you still recoil? five years from now i shall detect you in the fact! downward, downward, lies your way; nor can anything but death avail to stop you.""it is true," markheim said huskily, "i have in some degree complied with evil. but it is so with all; the very saints, in the mere exercise of living, grow less dainty, and take on the tone of their surroundings.""i will propound to you one simple question," said the other; "and as you answer i shall read to you your moral horoscope. you have grown in many things more lax; possibly you do right to be so; and at any account, it is the same with all men. but granting that, are you in any one particular, however trifling, more difficult to please with your own conduct, or do you go in all things with a looser rein?""in any one?" repeated markheim, with an anguish of consideration. "no," he added, with despair; "in none! i have gone down in all.""then," said the visitor, "content yourself with what you are, for you will never change; and the words of your part on this stage are irrevocably written down."markheim stood for a long while silent, and, indeed, it was the visitor who first broke the silence. "that being so," he said, "shall i show you the money?""and grace?" cried markheim."have you not tried it?" returned the other. "two or three years ago did i not see you on the platform of revival meetings, and was not your voice the loudest in the hymn?""it is true," said markheim; "and i see clearly what remains for me by way of duty. i thank you for these lessons from my soul; my eyes are opened, and i behold myself at last for what i am."at this moment, the sharp note of the door-bell rang through the house; and the visitant, as though this were some concerted signal for which he had been waiting, changed at once in his demeanour."the maid!" he cried. "she has returned, as i forewarned you, and there is now before you one more difficult passage. her master, you must say, is ill; you must let her in, with an assured but rather serious countenance; no smiles, no overacting, and i promise you success! once the girl within, and the door closed, the same dexterity that has already rid you of the dealer will relieve you of this last danger in your path. thenceforward you have the whole evening--the whole night, if needful--to ransack the treasures of the house and to make good your safety. this is help that comes to you with the mask of danger. up!" he cried; "up, friend. your life hangs trembling in the scales; up, and act!"markheim steadily regarded his counsellor. "if i be condemned to evil acts," he said, "there is still one door of freedom open: i can cease from action. if my life be an ill thing, i can lay it down. though i be, as you say truly, at the beck of every small temptation, i can yet, by one decisive gesture, place myself beyond the reach of all. my love of good is damned to barrenness; it may, and let it be! but i have still my hatred of evil; and from that, to your galling disappointment, you shall see that i can draw both energy and courage."the features of the visitor began to undergo a wonderful and lovely change: they brightened and softened with a tender triumph, and, even as they brightened, faded and dislimned. but markheim did not pause to watch or understand the transformation. he opened the door and went downstairs very slowly, thinking to himself. his past went soberly before him; he beheld it as it was, ugly and strenuous like a dream, random as chance medley--a scene of defeat. life, as he thus reviewed it, tempted him no longer; but on the further side he perceived a quiet haven for his bark. he paused in the passage, and looked into the shop, where the candle still burned by the dead body. it was strangely silent. thoughts of the dealer swarmed into his mind, as he stood gazing. and then the bell once more broke out into impatient clamour.he confronted the maid upon the threshold with something like a smile."you had better go for the police," said he; "i have killed your master."over the great door of an old, old church which stood in a quiet town of a faraway land there was carved in stone the figure of a large griffin. the old-time sculptor had done his work with great care, but the image he had made was not a pleasant one to look at. it had a large head, with enormous open mouth and savage teeth; from its back arose great wings, armed with sharp hooks and prongs; it had stout legs in front, with projecting claws, but there were no legs behind--the body running out into a long and powerful tail, finished off at the end with a barbed point. this tail was coiled up under him, the end sticking up just back of his wings.the sculptor, or the people who had ordered this stone figure, had evidently been very much pleased with it, for little copies of it, also of stone, had been placed here and there along the sides of the church, not very far from the ground so that people could easily look at them, and ponder on their curious forms. there were a great many other sculptures on the outside of this church--saints, martyrs, grotesque heads of men, beasts, and birds, as well as those of other creatures which cannot be named, because nobody knows exactly what they were; but none were so curious and interesting as the great griffin over the door, and the little griffins on the sides of the church.a long, long distance from the town, in the midst of dreadful wilds scarcely known to man, there dwelt the griffin whose image had been put up over the church door. in some way or other, the old-time sculptor had seen him and afterward, to the best of his memory, had copied his figure in stone.the griffin had never known this, until, hundreds of years afterward, he heard from a bird, from a wild animal, or in some manner which it is not now easy to find out, that there was a likeness of him on the old church in the distant town.now, this griffin had no idea how he looked. he had never seen a mirror, and the streams where he lived were so turbulent and violent that a quiet piece of water, which would reflect the image of anything looking into it, could not be found. being, as far as could be ascertained, the very last of his race, he had never seen another griffin. therefore it was that, when he heard of this stone image of himself, he became very anxious to know what he looked like, and at last he determined to go to the old church, and see for himself what manner of being he was.so he started off from the dreadful wilds, and flew on and on until he came to the countries inhabited by men, where his appearance in the air created great consternation; but he alighted nowhere, keeping up a steady flight until he reached the suburbs of the town which had his image on its church. here, late in the afternoon, he lighted in a green meadow by the side of a brook, and stretched himself on the grass to rest. his great wings were tired, for he had not made such a long flight in a century, or more.the news of his coming spread quickly over the town, and the people, frightened nearly out of their wits by the arrival of so strange a visitor, fled into their houses, and shut themselves up. the griffin called loudly for someone to come to him but the more he called, the more afraid the people were to show themselves. at length he saw two laborers hurrying to their homes through the fields, and in a terrible voice he commanded them to stop. not daring to disobey, the men stood, trembling."what is the matter with you all?" cried the griffin. "is there not a man in your town who is brave enough to speak to me?""i think," said one of the laborers, his voice shaking so that his words could hardly be understood, "that-perhaps--the minor canon--would come.""go, call him, then" said the griffin; "i want to see him."the minor canon, who was an assistant in the old church, had just finished the afternoon services, and was coming out of a side door, with three aged women who had formed the weekday congregation. he was a young man of a kind disposition, and very anxious to do good to the people of the town. apart from his duties in the church, where he conducted services every weekday, he visited the sick and the poor, counseled and assisted persons who were in trouble, and taught a school composed entirely of the bad children in the town with whom nobody else would have anything to do. whenever the people wanted something difficult done for them, they always went to the minor canon. thus it was that the laborer thought of the young priest when he found that someone must come and speak to the griffin.the minor canon had not heard of the strange event, which was known to the whole town except himself and the three old women and when he was informed of it, and was told that the griffin had asked to see him, he was greatly amazed and frightened."me!" he exclaimed. "he has never heard of me! what should he want with me?""oh! you must go instantly!" cried the two men. "he is very angry now because he has been kept waiting so long; and nobody knows what may happen if you don't hurry to him."the poor minor canon would rather have had his hand cut off than go out to meet an angry griffin but he felt that it was his duty to go for it would be a woeful thing if injury should come to the people of the town because he was not brave enough to obey the summons of the griffin. so, pale and frightened, he started off.'well," said the griffin, as soon as the young man came near, "i am glad to see that there is someone who has the courage to come to me."the minor canon did not feel very brave, but he bowed his head.'is this the town," said the griffin, "where there is a church with a likeness of myself over one of the doors?"the minor canon looked at the frightful creature before him and saw that it was, without doubt, exactly like the stone image on the church. "yes," he said, "you are right.""well, then," said the griffin, "will you take me to it? i wish very much to see it."the minor canon instantly thought that if the griffin entered the town without the people's knowing what he came for, some of them would probably be frightened to death, and so he sought to gain time to prepare their minds.'it is growing dark, now," he said, very much afraid, as he spoke, that his words might enrage the griffin, "and objects on the front of the church cannot be seen clearly. it will be better to wait until morning, if you wish to get a good view of the stone image of yourself.""that will suit me very well," said the griffin. "i see you are a man of good sense. i am tired, and i will take a nap here on this soft grass, while i cool my tail in the little stream that runs near me. the end of my tail gets red-hot when i am angry or excited, and it is quite warm now. so you may go; but be sure and come early tomorrow morning, and show me the way to the church."the minor canon was glad enough to take his leave, and hurried into the town. in front of the church he found a great many people assembled to hear his report of his interview with the griffin.  when they found that he had not come to spread rum, but simply to see his stony likeness on the church, they showed neither relief nor gratification, but began to upbraid the minor canon for consenting to conduct the creature into the town.'what could i do?" cried the young man. "if i should not bring him he would come himself, and, perhaps, end by setting fire to the town with his red-hot tail."still the people were not satisfied, and a great many plans were proposed to prevent the griffin from coming into the town. some elderly persons urged that the young men should go out and kill him; but the young men scoffed at such a ridiculous idea.then someone said that it would be a good thing to destroy the stone image, so that the griffin would have no excuse for entering the town; and this plan was received with such favor that many of the people ran for hammers, chisels, and crowbars, with which to tear down and break up the stone griffin. but the minor canon resisted this plan with all the strength of his mind and body. he assured the people that this action would enrage the griffin beyond measure, for it would be impossible to conceal from him that his image had been destroyed during the night. but the people were so determined to break up the stone griffin that the minor canon saw that there was nothing for him to do but to stay there and protect it. all night he walked up and down in front of the church door, keeping away the men who brought ladders, by which they might mount to the great stone griffin, and knock it to pieces with their hammers and crowbars. after many hours the people were obliged to give up their attempts, and went home to sleep; but the minor canon remained at his post till early morning, and then he hurried away to the field where he had left the griffin.the monster had just awakened, and rising to his forelegs and shaking himself he said that he was ready to go into the town. the minor canon, therefore, walked back, the griffin flying slowly through the air, at a short distance above the head of his guide. not a person was to be seen in the streets, and they went directly to the front of the church, where the minor canon pointed out the stone griffin.the real griffin settled down in the little square before the church and gazed earnestly at his sculptured likeness. for a long time he looked at it. first he put his head on one side, and then he put it on the other; then he shut his right eye and gazed with his left, after which he shut his left eye and gazed with his right. then he moved a little to one side and looked at the image, then he moved the other way. after a while he said to the minor canon, who had been standing by all this time:"it is, it must be, an excellent likeness! that breadth between the eyes, that expansive forehead, those massive jaws! i feel that it must resemble me. if there is any fault to find with it, it is that the neck seems a little stiff. but that is nothing. it is an admirable likeness--admirable!"the griffin sat looking at his image all the morning and all the afternoon. the minor canon had been afraid to go away and leave him, and had hoped all through the day that he would soon be satisfied with his inspection and fly away home. but by evening the poor young man was very tired, and felt that he must eat and sleep. he frankly said this to the griffin, and asked him if he would not like something to eat. he said this because he felt obliged in politeness to do so, but as soon as he had spoken the words, he was seized with dread lest the monster should demand half a dozen babies, or some tempting repast of that kind."oh, no," said the griffin; 'i never eat between the equinoxes. at the vernal and at the autumnal equinox i take a good meal, and that lasts me for half a year. i am extremely regular in my habits, and do not think it healthful to eat at odd times. but if you need food, go and get it, and i will return to the soft grass where i slept last night and take another nap."the next day the griffin came again to the little square before the church, and remained there until evening, steadfastly regarding the stone griffin over the door. the minor canon came out once or twice to look at him, and the griffin seemed very glad to see him; but the young clergyman could not stay as he had done before, for he had many duties to perform. nobody went to the church, but the people came to the minor canon's house, and anxiously asked him how long the griffin was going to stay."i do not know," he answered, "but i think he will soon be satisfied with regarding his stone likeness, and then he will go away."but the griffin did not go away. morning after morning he came to the church; but after a time he did not stay there all day. he seemed to have taken a great fancy to the minor canon, and followed him about as he worked. he would wait for him at the side door of the church, for the minor canon held services every day, morning and evening, though nobody came now. "if anyone should come," he said to himself, "i must be found at my post." when the young man came out, the griffin would accompany him in his visits to the sick and the poor, and would often look into the windows of the schoolhouse where the minor canon was teaching his unruly scholars. all the other schools were closed, but the parents of the minor canon's scholars forced them to go to school, because they were so bad they could not endure them all day at home--griffin or no griffin. but it must be said they generally behaved very well when that great monster sat up on his tail and looked in at the schoolroom window.when it was found that the griffin showed no sign of going away, all the people who were able to do so left the town. the canons and the higher officers of the church had fled away during the first day of the griffin's visit, leaving behind only the minor canon and some of the men who opened the doors and swept the church. all the citizens who could afford it shut up their houses and traveled to distant parts, and only the working people and the poor were left behind. after some days these ventured to go about and attend to their business, for if they did not work they would starve. they were getting a little used to seeing the griffin; and having been told that he did not eat between equinoxes, they did not feel so much afraid of him as before.day by day the griffin became more and more attached to the minor canon. he kept near him a great part of the time, and often spent the night in front of the little house where the young clergyman lived alone. this strange companionship was often burdensome to the minor canon, but, on the other hand, he could not deny that he derived a great deal of benefit and instruction from it. the griffin had lived for hundreds of years, and had seen much, and he told the minor canon many wonderful things."it is like reading an old book," said the young clergyman to himself; "but how many books i would have had to read before i would have found out what the griffin has told me about the earth, the air, the water, about minerals, and metals, and growing things, and all the wonders of the world!"thus the summer went on, and drew toward its close. and now the people of the town began to be very much troubled again."it will not be long," they said, "before the autumnal equinox is here, and then that monster will want to eat. he will be dreadfully hungry, for he has taken so much exercise since his last meal. he will devour our children. without doubt, he will eat them all. what is to be done?"to this question no one could give an answer, but all agreed that the griffin must not be allowed to remain until the approaching equinox. after talking over the matter a great deal, a crowd of the people went to the minor canon at a time when the griffin was not with him.'it is all your fault," they said, "that that monster is among us. you brought him here, and you ought to see that he goes away. it is only on your account that he stays here at all; for, although he visits his image every day, he is with you the greater part of the time. if you were not here, he would not stay. it is your duty to go away, and then he will follow you, and we shall be free from the dreadful danger which hangs over us.""go away!" cried the minor canon, greatly grieved at being spoken to in such a way. "where shall i go? if i go to some other town, shall i not take this trouble there? have i a right to do that?""no," said the people, "you must not go to any other town. there is no town far enough away. you must go to the dreadful wilds where the griffin lives, and then he will follow you and stay there."they did not say whether or not they expected the minor canon to stay there also, and he did not ask them anything about it. he bowed his head, and went into his house to think. the more he thought, the more clear it became to his mind that it was his duty to go away, and thus free the town from the presence of the griffin.that evening he packed a leathern bag full of bread and meat, and early the next morning he set out or his journey to the dreadful wilds. it was a long, weary, and doleful journey, especially after he had gone beyond the habitations of men; but the minor canon kept on bravely, and never faltered.the way was longer than he had expected, and his provisions soon grew so scanty that he was obliged to eat but a little every day; but he kept up his courage, and pressed on, and, after many days of toilsome travel, he reached the dreadful wilds.when the griffin found that the minor canon had left the town he seemed sorry, but showed no desire to go and look for him. after a few days had passed he became much annoyed, and asked some of the people where the minor canon had gone. but, although the citizens had been so anxious that the young clergyman should go to the dreadful wilds, thinking that the griffin would immediately follow him, they were now afraid to mention the minor canon's destination, for the monster seemed angry already, and if he should suspect their trick he would, doubtless, become very much enraged. so  everyone said he did not know, and the griffin wandered about disconsolate. one morning he looked into the minor canon's schoolhouse, which was always empty now, and thought that it was a shame that everything should suffer on account of the young man's absence."it does not matter so much about the church," he said, "for nobody went there; but it is a pity about the school. i think i will teach it myself until he returns."it was the hour for opening the school, and the griffin went inside and pulled the rope which rang the school bell. some of the children who heard the bell ran in to see what was the matter, supposing it to be a joke of one of their companions; but when they saw the griffin they stood astonished and scared."go tell the other scholars," said the monster, "that school is about to open, and that if they are not all here in ten minutes i shall come after them."in seven minutes every scholar was in place.never was seen such an orderly school. not a boy or girl moved or uttered a whisper. the griffin climbed into the master's seat, his wide wings spread on each side of him, because he could not lean back in his chair while they stuck out behind, and his great tail coiled around, in front of the desk, the barbed end sticking up, ready to tap any boy or girl who might misbehave.the griffin now addressed the scholars, telling them that he intended to teach them while their master was away. in speaking he tried to imitate, as far as possible, the mild and gentle tones of the minor canon; but it must be admitted that in this he was not very successful. he had paid a good deal of attention to the studies of the school, and he determined not to try to teach them anything new, but to review them in what they had been studying; so he called up the various classes, and questioned them upon their previous lessons. the children racked their brains to remember what they had learned. they were so afraid of the griffin's displeasure that they recited as they had never recited before. one of the boys, far down in his class, answered so well that the griffin was astonished.'i should think you would be at the head," said he. "i am sure you have never been in the habit of reciting so well. why is this?""because i did not choose to take the trouble," said the boy, trembling in his boots. he felt obliged to speak the truth, for all the children thought that the great eyes of the griffin could see right through them, and that he would know when they told a falsehood."you ought to be ashamed of yourself," said the griffin. "go down to the very tail of the class; and if you are not at the head in two days, i shall know the reason why."the next afternoon this boy was number one.it was astonishing how much these children now learned of what they had been studying. it was as if they had been educated over again. the griffin used no severity toward them, but there was a look about him which made them unwilling to go to bed until they were sure they knew their lessons for the next day.the griffin now thought that he ought to visit the sick and the poor; and he began to go about the town for this purpose. the effect upon the sick was miraculous. all, except those who were very ill indeed, jumped from their beds when they heard he was coming, and declared themselves quite well. to those who could not get up he gave herbs and roots, which none of them had ever before thought of as medicines, but which the griffin had seen used in various parts of the world; and most of them recovered. but, for all that, they afterward said that, no matter what happened to them, they hoped that they should never again have such a doctor coming to their bedsides, feeling their pulses and looking at their tongues.as for the poor, they seemed to have utterly disappeared. all those who had depended upon charity for their daily bread were now at work in some way or other; many of them offering to do odd jobs for their neighbors just for the sake of their meals--a thing which before had been seldom heard of in the town. the griffin could find no one who needed his assistance.the summer had now passed, and the autumnal equinox was rapidly approaching. the citizens were in a state of great alarm and anxiety. the griffin showed no signs of going away, but seemed to have settled himself permanently among them. in a short time the day for his semiannual meal would arrive, and then what would happen? the monster would certainly be very hungry, and would devour all their children.now they greatly regretted and lamented that they had sent away the minor canon; he was the only one on whom they could have depended in this trouble, for he could talk freely with the griffin, and so find out what could be done. but it would not do to be inactive. some step must be taken immediately. a meeting of the citizens was called, and two old men were appointed to go and talk to the griffin. they were instructed to offer to prepare a splendid dinner for him on equinox day-one which would entirely satisfy his hunger. they would offer him the fattest mutton, the most tender beef fish,  and game of various sorts, and anything of the kind that he might fancy. if none of these suited, they were to mention that there was an orphan asylum in the next town."anything would be better," said the citizens, "than to have our dear children devoured."the old men went to the griffin; but their propositions were not received with favor."from what i have seen of the people of this town," said the monster, "i do not think i could relish anything which was prepared by them. they appear to be all cowards and, therefore, mean and selfish. as for eating one of them, old or young, i could not think of it for a moment. in fact, there was only one creature in the whole place for whom i could have had any appetite, and that is the minor canon, who has gone away. he was brave, and good, and honest, and i think i should have relished him.""ah!" said one of the old men very politely, "in that case i wish we had not sent him to the dreadful wilds!""what!" cried the griffin. "what do you mean? explain instantly what you are talking about!"the old man, terribly frightened at what he had said, was obliged to tell how the minor canon had been sent away by the people, in the hope that the griffin might be induced to follow him.when the monster heard this he became furiously angry. he dashed away from the old men, and, spreading his wings, flew backward and forward over the town. he was so much excited that his tail became red-hot, and glowed like a meteor against the evening sky. when at last he settled down in the little field where he usually rested, and thrust his tail into the brook, the steam arose like a cloud, and the water of the stream ran hot through the town. the citizens were greatly frightened, and bitterly blamed the old man for telling about the minor canon."it is plain," they said, "that the griffin intended at last to go and look for him, and we should have been saved. now who can tell what misery you have brought upon us."the griffin did not remain long in the little field. as soon as his tail was cool he flew to the town hall and rang the bell. the citizens knew that they were expected to come there; and although they were afraid to go, they were still more afraid to stay away; and they crowded into the hall. the griffin was on the platform at one end, flapping his wings and walking up and down, and the end of his tail was still so warm that it slightly scorched the boards as he dragged it after him.when everybody who was able to come was there, the griffin stood still and addressed the meeting.'i have had a very low opinion of you," he said, "ever since i discovered what cowards you are, but i had no idea that you were so ungrateful, selfish, and cruel as i now find you to be. here was your minor canon, who labored day and night for your good, and thought of nothing else but how he might benefit you and make you happy; and as soon as you imagine yourselves threatened with a danger--for well i know you are dreadfully afraid of me--you send him off, caring not whether he returns or perishes, hoping thereby to save yourselves. now, i had conceived a great liking for that young man, and had intended, in a day or two, to go and look him up. but i have changed my mind about him. i shall go and find him, but i shall send him back here to live among you, and i intend that he shall enjoy the reward of his labor and his sacrifices."go, some of you, to the officers of the church, who so cowardly ran away when i first came here, and tell them never to return to this town under penalty of death. and if, when your minor canon comes back to you, you do not bow yourselves before him, put him in the highest place among you, and serve and honor him all his life, beware of my terrible vengeance! there were only two good things in this town: the minor canon and the stone image of myself over your church door. one of these you have sent away, and the other i shall carry away myself."with these words he dismissed the meeting, and it was time, for the end of his tail had become so hot that there was danger of it setting fire to the building.the next morning the griffin came to the church, and tearing the stone image of himself from its fastenings over the great door he grasped it with his powerful forelegs and flew up into the air. then, after hovering over the town for a moment, he gave his tail an angry shake and took up his flight to the dreadful wilds. when he reached this desolate region, he set the stone griffin upon a ledge of a rock which rose in front of the dismal cave he called his home. there the image occupied a position somewhat similar to that it had had over the church door; and the griffin, panting with the exertion of carrying such an enormous load to so great a distance, lay down upon the ground and regarded it with much satisfaction. when he felt somewhat rested he went to look for the minor canon. he found the young man, weak and half starved, lying under the shadow of a rock. after picking him up and carrying him to his cave, the griffin flew away to a distant marsh, where he procured some roots and herbs which he well knew were strengthening and beneficial to man, though he had never tasted them himself. after eating these the minor canon was greatly revived, and sat up and listened while the griffin told him what had happened in the town."do you know," said the monster, when he had finished, "that i have had, and still have, a great liking for you?""i am very glad to hear it," said the minor canon, with his usual politeness."i am not at all sure that you would be," said the griffin, "if you thoroughly understood the state of the case; but we will not consider that now. if some things were different, other things would be otherwise. i have been so enraged by discovering the manner in which you have been treated that i have determined that you shall at last enjoy the rewards and honors to which you are entitled. lie down and have a good sleep, and then i will take you back to the town."as he heard these words, a look of trouble came over the young man's face."you need not give yourself any anxiety," said the griffin, "about my return to the town. i shall not remain there. now that i have that admirable likeness of myself in front of my cave, where i can sit at my leisure, and gaze upon its noble features and magnificent proportions, i have no wish to see that abode of cowardly and selfish people."the minor canon, relieved from his fears, lay back, and dropped into a doze; and when he was sound asleep the griffin took him up, and carried him back to the town. he arrived just before daybreak, and putting the young man gently on the grass in the little field where he himself used to rest, the monster, without having been seen by any of the people, flew back to his home.when the minor canon made his appearance in the morning among the citizens, the enthusiasm and cordiality with which he was received were truly wonderful. he was taken to a house which had been occupied by one of the banished high officers of the place, and everyone was anxious to do all that could be done for his health and comfort. the people crowded into the church when he held services, so that the three old women who used to be his weekday congregation could not get to the best seats, which they had always been in the habit of taking; and the parents of the bad children determined to reform them at home, in order that he might be spared the trouble of keeping up his former school. the minor canon was appointed to the highest office of the old church, and before he died, he became a bishop.during the first years after his return from the dreadful wilds, the people of the town looked up to him as a man to whom they were bound to do honor and reverence; but they often, also, looked up to the sky to see if there were any signs of the griffin coming back. however, in the course of time, they learned to honor and reverence their former minor canon without the fear of being punished if they did not do so.but they need never have been afraid of the griffin. the autumnal equinox day came round, and the monster ate nothing. if he could not have the minor canon, he did not care for anything. so, lying down, with his eyes fixed upon the great stone griffin, he gradually declined, and died. it was a good thing for some of the people of the town that they did not know this.if you should ever visit the old town, you would still see the little griffins on the sides of the church; but the great stone griffin that was over the door is gone.in the very olden time, there lived a semi-barbaric king, whose ideas, though somewhat polished and sharpened by the progressiveness of distant latin neighbors, were still large, florid, and untrammelled, as became the half of him which was barbaric. he was a man of exuberant fancy, and, withal, of an authority so irresistible that, at his will, he turned his varied fancies into facts. he was greatly given to self-communing; and, when he and himself agreed upon any thing, the thing was done. when every member of his domestic and political systems moved smoothly in its appointed course, his nature was bland and genial; but whenever there was a little hitch, and some of his orbs got out of their orbits, he was blander and more genial still, for nothing pleased him so much as to make the crooked straight, and crush down uneven places.among the borrowed notions by which his barbarism had become semified was that of the public arena, in which, by exhibitions of manly and beastly valor, the minds of his subjects were refined and cultured.but even here the exuberant and barbaric fancy asserted itself. the arena of the king was built, not to give the people an opportunity of hearing the rhapsodies of dying gladiators, nor to enable them to view the inevitable conclusion of a conflict between religious opinions and hungry jaws, but for purposes far better adapted to widen and develop the mental energies of the people. this vast amphitheatre, with its encircling galleries, its mysterious vaults, and its unseen passages, was an agent of poetic justice, in which crime was punished. or virtue rewarded, by the decrees of an impartial and incorruptible chance.when a subject was accused of a crime of sufficient importance to interest the king, public notice was given that on an appointed day the fate of the accused person would be decided in the king's arena,--a structure which well deserved its name; for, although its form and plan were borrowed--from afar, its purpose emanated solely from the brain of this man, who, every barleycorn a king, knew no tradition to which he owed more allegiance than pleased his fancy, and who ingrafted on every adopted form of human thought and action the rich growth of his barbaric idealism.when all the people had assembled in the galleries, and the king, surrounded by his court, sat high up on his throne of royal state on one side of the arena, he gave a signal, a door beneath him opened, and the accused subject stepped out into the amphitheatre. directly opposite him, on the other side of the enclosed space, were two doors, exactly alike and side by side. it was the duty and the privilege of the person on trial, to walk directly to these  doors and open one of them. he could open either door he pleased: he was subject to no guidance or influence but that of the aforementioned impartial and incorruptible chance. if he opened the one, there came out of it a hungry tiger, the fiercest and most cruel that could be procured, which immediately sprang upon him, and tore him to pieces, as a punishment for his guilt. the moment that the case of the criminal was thus decided, doleful iron bells were clanged, great wails went up from the hired mourners posted on the outer rim of the arena, and the vast audience, with bowed heads and downcast hearts, wended slowly their homeward way, mourning greatly that one so young and fair, or so old and respected, should have merited so dire a fate.but, if the accused person opened the other door, there came forth from it a lady, the most suitable to his years and station that his majesty could select among his fair subjects; and to this lady he was immediately married, as a reward of his innocence. it mattered not that he might already possess a wife and family, or that his affections might be engaged upon an object of his own selection: the king allowed no such subordinate arrangements to interfere with his great scheme of retribution and reward. the exercises, as in the other instance, took place immediately, and in the arena. another door opened beneath the king, and a priest, followed by a band of choristers' and dancing maidens blowing joyous airs on golden horns and treading an measure, advanced to where the pair stood side by side; and the wedding was promptly and cheerily solemnized. then the gay brass bells rang forth their merry peals, the people shouted glad hurrahs, and the innocent man, preceded by children strewing flowers on his path, led his bride to his home.this was the king's semi-barbaric method of administering justice. its perfect fairness is obvious. the criminal could not know out of which door would come the lady: he opened either he pleased, without having the slightest idea whether, in the next instant, he was to be devoured or married. on some occasions the tiger came out of one door, and on some out of the other. the decisions of this tribunal were not only fair, they were positively determinate: the accused person was instantly punished if he found himself guilty; and, if innocent, he was rewarded on the spot, whether he liked it or not. there was no escape from the judgments of the king's arena.the institution was a very popular one. when the people gathered together on one of the great trial days, they never knew whether they were to witness a bloody slaughter or a hilarious wedding. this element of uncertainty lent an interest to the occasion which it could not otherwise have attained. thus, the masses were entertained and pleased, and the thinking part of the community could bring no charge of unfairness against this plan; for did not the accused person have the whole matter in his own hands?this semi-barbaric king had a daughter as blooming as his most florid fancies, and with a soul as fervent and imperious as his own. as is usual in such cases, she was the apple of his eye, and was loved by him above all humanity. among his courtier was a young man of that fineness of blood and lowness of station common to the conventional heroes of romance who love royal maidens. this royal maiden was well satisfied with her lover, for he was handsome and brave to a degree unsurpassed in all this kingdom; and she loved him with an ardor that had enough of barbarism in it to make it exceedingly warm and strong. this love affair moved on happily for many months, until one day the king happened to discover its existence. he did not hesitate nor waver in regard to his duty in the premises. the youth was immediately cast into prison, and a day was appointed for his trial in the king's arena. this, of course, was an especially important occasion; and his majesty, as well as all the people, was greatly interested in the workings and development of this trial.never before had such a case occurred; never before had a subject dared to love the daughter of a king. in after-years such things became commonplace enough; but then they were, in no slight degree, novel and startling.the tiger-cages of the kingdom were searched for the most savage and relentless beasts, from which the fiercest monster might be selected for the arena; and the ranks of maiden youth and beauty throughout the land were carefully surveyed by competent judges, in order that the young man might have a fitting bride in case fate did not determine for him a different destiny. of course, everybody knew that the deed with which the accused was charged had been done. he had loved the princess, and neither he, she, nor any one else thought of denying the fact; but the king would not think of allowing any fact of this kind to interfere with the workings of the tribunal, in which he took such great delight and satisfaction. no matter how the affair turned out, the youth would be disposed of; and the king would take an aesthetic pleasure in watching the course of events, which would determine whether or not the young man had done wrong in allowing himself to love the princess.the appointed day arrived. from far and near the people gathered, and thronged the great galleries of the arena; and crowds, unable to gain admittance, massed themselves against its outside walls. the king and his court were in their places, opposite the twin doors,--those fateful portals, so terrible in their similarity.all was ready. the signal was given. a door beneath the royal party opened, and the lover of the princess walked into the arena. tall, beautiful, fair, his appearance was greeted with a low hum of admiration and anxiety. half the audience had not known so grand a youth had lived among them. no wonder the princess loved him! what a terrible thing for him to be there!as the youth advanced into the arena, he turned, as the custom was, to bow to the king: but he did not think at all of that royal personage; his eyes were fixed upon the princess, who sat to the right of her father. had it not been for the moiety of barbarism in her nature, it is probable that lady would not have been there; but her intense and fervid soul would not allow her to be absent on an occasion in which she was so terribly interested. from the moment that the decree had gone forth, that her lover should decide his fate in the king's arena, she had thought of nothing, night or day, but this great event and the various subjects connected with it. possessed of more power, influence, and force of character than any one who had ever before been interested in such a case, she had done what no other person had done,--she had possessed herself of the secret of the doors. she knew in which of the two rooms, that lay behind those doors, stood the cage of the tiger, with its open front, and in which waited the lady. through these thick doors, heavily curtained with skins on the inside, it was impossible that any noise or suggestion should come from within to the person who should approach to raise the latch of one of them; but gold, and the power of a woman's will, had brought the secret to the princess.and not only did she know in which room stood the lady ready to emerge, all blushing and radiant, should her door be opened, but she knew who the lady was. it was one of the fairest and loveliest of the damsels of the court who had been selected as the reward of the accused youth, should he be proved innocent of the crime of aspiring to one so far above him; and the princess hated her. often had she seen, or imagined that she had seen, this fair creature throwing glances of admiration upon the person of her lover, and sometimes she thought these glances were perceived and even returned. now and then she had seen them talking together; it was but for a moment or two, but much can be said in a brief space; it may have been on most unimportant topics, but how could she know that? the girl was lovely, but she had dared to raise her eyes to the loved one of the princess; and, with all the intensity of the savage blood transmitted to her through long lines of wholly barbaric ancestors, she hated the woman who blushed and trembled behind that silent door.when her lover turned and looked at her, and his eye met hers as she sat there paler and whiter than any one in the vast ocean of anxious faces about her, he saw, by that power of quick perception which is given to those whose souls are one, that she knew behind which door crouched the tiger, and behind which stood the lady. he had expected her to know it. he understood her nature, and his soul was assured that she would never rest until she had made plain to herself this thing, hidden to all other lookers-on, even to the king. the only hope for the youth in which there was any element of certainty was based upon the success of the princess in discovering this mystery; and the moment he looked upon her, he saw she had succeeded, as in his soul he knew she would succeed.then it was that his quick and anxious glance asked the question: "which?" it was as plain to her as if he shouted it from where he stood. there was not an instant to be lost. the question was asked in a rash; it must be answered in another.her right arm lay on the cushioned parapet before her. she raised her hand, and made a slight, quick movement toward the right. no one but her lover saw her. every eye but his was fixed on the man in the arena.he turned, and, with a firm and rapid step he walked across the empty space. every heart stopped beating, every breath was held, every eye was fixed immovably upon that man. without the slightest hesitation, he went to the door on the right, and opened it.now, the point of the story is this: did the tiger come out of that door, or did the lady?the more we reflect upon this question, the harder it is to answer. it involves a study of the human heart which leads us through devious mazes of passion, out of which it is difficult to find our way. think of it, fair reader, not as if the decision of the question depended upon yourself, but upon that hot-blooded, semi-barbaric princess, her soul at a white heat beneath the combined fires of despair and jealousy. she had lost him, but who should have him?how often, in her waking hours and in her dreams, had she started in wild horror, and covered her face with her hands, as she thought of her lover opening the door on the other side of which waited the cruel fangs of the tiger!but how much oftener had she seen him at the other door! how in her grievous reveries had she gnashed her teeth, and torn her hair, when she saw his start of rapturous delight as he opened the door of the lady! how her soul had burned in agony when she had seen him rush to meet that woman, with her flushing cheek and sparkling eye of triumph; when she had seen him lead her forth, his whole frame kindled with the joy of recovered life; when she had heard the glad shouts from the multitude, and the wild ringing of the happy bells; when she had seen the priest, with his joyous followers, advance to the couple, and make them man and wife before her very eyes; and when she had seen them walk away together upon their path of flowers, followed by the tremendous shouts of the hilarious multitude, in which her one despairing shriek was lost and drowned!would it not be better for him to die at once, and go to wait for her in the blessed regions of semi-barbaric futurity?and yet, that awful tiger, those shrieks, that blood!her decision had been indicated in an instant, but it had been made after days and nights of anguished deliberation. she had known she would be asked, she had decided what she would answer, and, without the slightest hesitation, she had moved her hand to the right.the question of her decision is one not to be lightly considered, and it is not for me to presume to set myself up as the one person able to answer it. and so i leave it with all of you: which came out of the opened door,--the lady, or the tiger?i don't mind staying after school," i says to professor herbert, "but i'd rather you'd whip me with a switch and let me go home early. pa will whip me anyway for getting home two hours late.""you are too big to whip," says professor herbert, "and i have to punish you for climbing up in that cherry tree. you boys knew better than that! the other five boys have paid their dollar each. you have been the only one who has not helped pay for the tree. can't you borrow a dollar?""i can't," i says. "i'll have to take the punishment. i wish it would be quicker punishment. i wouldn't mind."professor herbert stood and looked at me. he was a big man. he wore a grey suit of clothes. the suit matched his grey hair."you don't know my father," i says to professor herbert. "he might be called a little old-fashioned. he makes us mind him until we're twenty-one years old. he believes: 'if you spare the rod you spoil the child.' i'll never be able to make him understand about the cherry tree. i'm the first of my people to go to high school.""you must take the punishment," says professor herbert. "you must stay two hours after school today and two hours after school tomorrow. i am allowing you twenty-five cents an hour. that is good money for a high-school student. you can sweep the schoolhouse floor, wash the blackboards, and clean windows. i'll pay the dollar for you."i couldn't ask professor herbert to loan me a doliar. he never offered to loan it to me. i had to stay and help the janitor and work out my fine at a quarter an hour.i thought as i swept the floor, "what will pa do to me? what lie can i tell him when i go home? why did we ever climb that cherry tree and break it down for anyway? why did we run crazy over the hills away from the crowd? why did we do all of this? six of us climbed up in a little cherry tree after one little lizard! why did the tree split and fall with us? it should have been a stronger tree! why did eif crabtree just happen to be below us plowing and catch us in his cherry tree? why wasn't he a better man than to charge us six dollars for the tree?"it was six o'clock when i left the schoolhouse. i had six miles to walk home. it would be after seven when i got home. i had all my work to do when i got home. it took pa and i both to do the work. seven cows to milk. nineteen head of cattle to feed, four mules, twenty-five hogs, firewood and stovewood to cut, and water to draw from the well. he would be doing it when i got home. he would be mad and wondering what was keeping me!i hurried home. i would run under the dark, leafless trees. i would walk fast uphill. i would run down the hill. the ground was freezing. i had to hurry. i had to run. i reached the long ridge that led to our cow pasture. i ran along this ridge. the wind dried the sweat on my face. i ran across the pasture to the house.i threw down my books in the chipyard. i ran to the barn to spread fodder on the ground for the cattle. i didn't take time to change my clean school clothes for my old work clothes. i ran out to the barn. i saw pa spreading fodder on the ground to the cattle. that was my job. i ran up to the fence. i says, "leave that for me, pa. i'll do it. i'm just a little late.""i see you are," says pa. he turned and looked at me. his eyes danced fire. "what in th' world has kept you so? why ain't you been here to help me with this work? make a gentleman out'n one boy in th' family and this is what you get! send you to high school and you get too onery fer th' buzzards to smell!"i never said anything. i didn't want to tell why i was late from school. pa stopped scattering the bundles of fodder. he looked at me. he says, "why are you gettin' in here this time o' night? you tell me or i'll take a hickory withe to you right here on th' spot!"i says, "i had to stay after school." i couldn't lie to pa. he'd go to school and find out why i had to stay. if i lied to him it would be too bad for me."why did you haf to stay atter school?" says pa.i says, "0ur biology class went on a field trip today. six of us boys broke down a cherry tree. we had to give a dollar apiece to pay for the tree. i didn't have the doliar. professor herbert is making me work out my dollar. he gives me twenty-five cents an hour. i had to stay in this afternoon. i'll have to stay in tomorrow afternoon!""are you telling me th' truth?" says pa."i'm telling you the truth," i says. "go and see for yourself.""that's just what i'll do in th' mornin'," says pa. "jist whose cherry tree did you break down?""eif crabtree's cherry tree!""what was you doin' clear out in eif crabtree's place?" says pa. "he lives four miles from th' county high school. don't they teach you no books at that high school? do they jist let you get out and gad over th' hillsides? if that's all they do i'll keep you at home, dave. i've got work here fer you to do!""pa," i says, "spring is just getting here. we take a subject in school where we have to have bugs, snakes, flowers, lizards, frogs, and plants. it is biology. it was a pretly day today. we went out to find a few of these. six of us boys saw a lizard at the same time sunning on a cherry tree. we all went up the tree to get it. we broke the tree down. it split at the forks. eif crabtree was plowing down below us. he ran up the hill and got our names. the other boys gave their dollar apiece. i didn't have mine. professor herbert put mine in for me. i have to work it out at school.""poor man's son, huh," says pa. "i'll attend to that myself in th' mornin'. i'll take keer o' 'im. he ain't from this county nohow. i'll go down there in th' mornin' and see 'im. lettin' you leave your books and galavant all over th' hills. what kind of a school is it nohow! didn't do that, my son, when i's a little shaver in school. all fared alike too.""pa, please don't go down there," i says, "just let me have fifty cents and pay the rest of my fine! i don't want you to go down there! i don't want you to start anything with professor herbert!"ashamed of your old pap are you, dave," says pa, "atter th' way i've worked to raise you! tryin' to send you to school so you can make a better livin' than i've made."i'll straighten this thing out myself! i'll take keer o' professor herbert myself! he ain't got no right to keep you in and let the other boys off jist because they've got th' money! i'm a poor man. a bullet will go in a professor same as it will any man. it will go in a rich man same as it will a poor man. now you get into this work before i take one o' these withes and cut the shirt off'n your back!"i thought once i'd run through the woods above the barn just as hard as i could go. i thought i'd leave high school and home forever! pa could not catch me! i'd get away! i couldn't go back to school with him. he'd have a gun and maybe he'd shoot professor herbert. it was hard to tell what he would do. i could tell pa that school had changed in the hills from the way it was when he was a boy, but he wouldn't understand. i could tell him we studied frogs, birds, snakes, lizards, flowers, insects. but pa wouldn't understand. if i did run away from home it wouldn't matter to pa. he would see professor herbert anyway. he would think that high school and professor herbert had run me away from home. there was no need to run away. i'd just have to stay, finish foddering the cattle, and go to school with pa the next morning.i would take a bundle of fodder, remove the hickory witheband from around it, and scatter it on rocks, clumps of green briers, and brush so the cattle wouldn't tramp it under their feet. i would lean it up against the oak trees and the rocks in the pasture just above our pigpen on the hill. the fodder was cold and frosty where it had set out in the stacks. i would carry bundles of the fodder from the stack until i had spread out a bundle for each steer. pa went to the barn to feed the mules and throw corn in the pen to the hogs.the moon shone bright in the cold march sky. i finished my work by moonlight. professor herbert really didn't know how much work i had to do at home. if he had known he would not have kept me after school. he would have loaned me a doliar to have paid my part on the cherry tree. he had never lived in the hills. he didn't know the way the hill boys had to work so that they could go to school. now he was teaching in a county high school where all the boys who attended were from hill farms.after i'd finished doing my work i went to the house and ate my supper. pa and mom had eaten. my supper was getting cold. i heard pa and mom talking in the front room. pa was telling mom about me staying in after school."i had to do all th' milkin' tonight, chop th' wood myself. it's too hard on me atter i've turned ground all day. i'm goin' to take a day off tomorrow and see if i can't remedy things a little. i'll go down to that high school tomorrow. i won't be a very good scholar fer professor herbert nohow. he won't keep me in atter school. i'll take a different kind of lesson down there and make 'im acquainted with it.""now, luster," says mom, "you jist stay away from there. don't cause a lot o' trouble. you can be jailed fer a trick like that. you'll get th' law atter you. you'll jist go down there and show off and plague your own boy dave to death in front o' all th' scholars!""plague or no plague," says pa, "he don't take into consideration what all i haf to do here, does he? i'll show 'im it ain't right to keep one boy in and let the rest go scot-free. my boy is good as th' rest, ain't he? a bullet will make a hole in a schoolteacher same as it will anybody else. he can't do me that way and get by with it. i'll plug 'im first. i aim to go down there bright and early in the mornin' and get all this straight! i aim to see about bug larnin' and this runnin' all over god's creation huntin' snakes, lizards, and frogs. ransackin' th' country and goin' through cherry orchards and breakin' th' trees down atter lizards! 0ld eif crabtree ought to a-poured th' hot lead to 'em instead o' chargin' six dollars fer th' tree! he ought to a-got old herbert th' first one!"i ate my supper. i slipped upstairs and lit the lamp. i tried to forget the whole thing. i studied plane geometry. then i studied my biology lesson. i could hardly study for thinking about pa. "he'll go to school with me in the morning. he'll take a gun for professor herbert! what will professor herbert think of me! i'll tell him when pa leaves that i couldn't help it. but pa might shoot him. i hate to go with pa. maybe he'll cool off about it tonight and not go in the morning."pa got up at four o'clock. he built a fire in the stove. then he built a fire in the fireplace. he got mom up to get breakfast. then he got me up to help feed and milk. by the time we had our work done at the barn, mom had breakfast ready for us. we ate our breakfast. daylight came and we could see the bare oak trees covered white with frost. the hills were white with frost. a cold wind was blowing. the sky was clear. the sun would soon come out and melt the frost. the afternoon would be warm with sunshine and the frozen ground with thaw. there would be mud on the hills again. muddy water would then run down the little ditches on the hills."now, dave," says pa, "let's get ready fer school. i aim to go with you this mornin' and look into bug larnin', frog larnin', lizard and snake larnin', and breakin' down cherry trees! i don't like no sicha foolish way o' larnin' myself!"pa hadn't forgot. i'd have to take him to school with me. he would take me to school with him. we were going early. i was glad we were going early. if pa pulled a gun on professor herbert there wouldn't be so many of my classmates there to see him.i knew that pa wouldn't be at home in the high school. he wore overalls, big boots, a blue shirt and a sheepskin coat and a slouched black hat gone to seed at the top. he put his gun in its holster. we started trudging toward the high schoo1 across the hill.it was early when we got to the county high school. professor herbert had just got there. i just thought as we walked up the steps into the schoolhouse, "maybe pa will find out professor herbert is a good man. he just doesn't know him. just like i felt toward the lambert boys across the hill. i didn't like them until i'd seen them and talked to them. after i went to school with them and talked to them, i liked them and we were friends. it's a lot in knowing the other fellow.""you're th' professor here, ain't you?" says pa."yes," says professor herbert, "and you are dave's father.""yes," says pa, pulling out his gun and laying it on the seat in professor herbert's office. professor herbert's eyes got big behind his black-rimmed glasses when he saw pa's gun. color came into his pale cheeks."jist a few things about this school i want to know," says pa. "i'm tryin' to make a scholar out'n dave. he's the only one out'n eleven youngins i've sent to high school. here he comes in late and leaves me all th' work to do! he said you's all out bug huntin' yesterday and broke a cherry tree down. he had to stay two hours atter school yesterday and work out money to pay on that cherry tree! is that right?""wwwwy," says professor herbert, "i guess it is."he looked at pa's gun."well," says pa, "this ain't no high school. it's a bug school, a lizard school, a snake school! it ain't no school nohow!""why did you bring that gun?" says professor herbert to pa."you see that little hole," says pa as he picked up the long blue forty-four and put his finger on the end of the barrel, "a bullet can come out'n that hole that will kill a schoolteacher same as it will any other man. it will kill a rich man same as a poor man. it will kill a man. but atter i come in and saw you, i know'd i wouldn't need it. this maul o' mine could do you up in a few minutes."pa stood there, big, hard, brown-skinned, and mighty beside of professor herbert. i didn't know pa was so much bigger and harder. i'd never seen pa in a schoolhouse before. i'd seen professor herbert. he'd always looked big before to me. he didn't look big standing beside of pa."i was only doing my duty," says professor herbert, "mr. sexton, and following the course of study the state provided us with.""course o' study," says pa, "what study, bug study? varmint study? takin' youngins to th' woods and their poor old ma's and pa's at home a-slavin' to keep 'em in school and give 'em a education! you know that's dangerous, too, puttin' a lot o' boys and giris out together like that!"students were coming into the schoolhouse now.professor herbert says, "close the door, dave, so others won't hear."i walked over and closed the door. i was shaking like a leaf in the wind. i thought pa was going to hit professor herbert every minute. he was doing all the talking. his face was getting red. the red color was coming through the brown, weather-beaten skin on pa's face."i was right with these students," says professor herbert. "i know what they got into and what they didn't. i didn't send one of the other teachers with them on this field trip. i went myself. yes, i took the boys and giris together. why not?""it jist don't look good to me," says pa, "a-takin' all this swarm of youngins out to pillage th' whole deestrict. breakin' down cherry trees. keepin' boys in atter school.""what else could i have done with dave, mr. sexton?" says professor herbert. "the boys didn't have any business all climbing that cherry tree after one lizard. one boy could have gone up in the tree and got it. the farmer charged us six dollars. it was a little steep, i think, but we had it to pay. must i make five boys pay and let your boy off? he said he didn't have the dollar and couldn't get it. so i put it in for him. i'm letting him work it out. he's not working for me. he's working for the school!""i jist don't know what you could a-done with 'im," says pa, "only a-larruped im with a withe! that's what he needed!""he's too big to whip," says professor herbert, pointing at me. "he's a man in size.""he's not too big fer me to whip," says pa. "they ain't too big until they're over twenty-one! it jist didn't look fair to me! work one and let th' rest out because they got th' money. i don't see what bugs has got to do with a high school! it don't look good to me nohow!"pa picked up his gun and put it back in its holster. the red color left professor herbert's face. he talked more to pa. pa softened a littie. it looked funny to see pa in the high-school building. it was the first time he'd ever been there."we were not only hunting snakes, toads, flowers, butterflies, lizards," says professor herbert, "but, mr. sexton, i was hunting dry timothy grass to put in an incubator and raise some protozoa."" i don't know what that is," says pa. "th' incubator is th' new-fangled way o' cheatin' th' hens and raisin' chickens. i ain't so sure about th' breed o' chickens you mentioned.""you've heard of germs, mr. sexton, haven't you?" says professor herbert."jist call me luster, if you don't mind," says pa, very casual like."all right, luster, you've heard of germs, haven't you?""yes," says pa, "but i don't believe in germs. i'm sixty-five years old and i ain't seen one yet!""you can't see them with your naked eye," says professor herbert. "just keep that gun in the holster and stay with me in the high school today. i have a few things want to show you. that scum on your teeth has germs in it.""what," says pa, "you mean to tell me i've got germs on my teeth!"yes," says professor herbert. "the same kind as we might be able to find in a living black snake if we dissect it!""i don't mean to dispute your word," says pa, "but i don't believe it. i don't believe i have germs on my teeth!""stay with me today and i'll show you. i want to take you through the school anyway! school has changed a lot in the hills since you went to school. i don't guess we had high schools in this county when you went to school!""no," says pa, "jist readin', writin', and cipherin'. we didn't have all this bug larnin', frog larnin', and findin' germs on your teeth and in the middle o' black snakes! th' world's changin'.""it is," says professor herbert, "and we hope all for the better. boys like your own there are going to help change it. he's your boy. he knows all of what i've told you. you stay with me today.""i'll shore stay with you," says pa. " i want to see th' germs off'n my teeth. i jist want to see a germ. i've never seen one in my life. 'seein' is believin',' pap allus told me."pa walks out of the office with professor herbert. i just hoped professor herbert didn't have pa arrested for pulling his gun. pa's gun has always been a friend to him when he goes to settle disputes.the bell rang. school took up. i saw the students when they marched in the schoolhouse look at pa. they would grin and punch each other. pa just stood and watched them pass in at the schoolhouse door. two long lines marched in the house. the boys and girls were clean and well dressed. pa stood over in the schoolyard under a leafless elm, in his sheepskin coat, his big boots laced in front with buckskin, and his heavy socks stuck above his boot tops. pa's overalis legs were baggy and wrinkled between his coat and boot tops. his blue work shirt showed at the collar. his big black hat showed his gray-streaked black hair. his face was hard and weather-tanned to the color of a ripe fodder blade. his hands were big and gnarled like the roots of the elm tree he stood beside.when i went to my first ciass i saw pa and professor herbert going around over the schoolhouse. i was in my geometry class when pa and professor herbert came in the room. we were explaining our propositions on the blackboard. professor herbert and pa just quietly came in and sat down for awhile. i heard fred wutts whisper to glenn armstrong, "who is that old man? lord, he's a rough-looking scamp." glenn whispered back, "i think he's dave's pap." the students in geometry looked at pa. they must have wondered what he was doing in school. before the ciass was over, pa and professor herbert got up and went out. i saw them together down on the playground. professor herbert was explaining to pa. i could see the prints of pa's gun under his coat when he'd walk around.at noon in the high-school cafeteria pa and professor herbert sat together at the little table where professor herbert always ate by himself. they ate together. the students watched the way pa ate. he ate with his knife instead of his fork. a lot of the students felt sorry for me after they found out he was my father. they didn't have to feel sorry for me. i wasn't ashamed of pa after i found out he wasn't going to shoot professor herbert. i was glad they had made friends. i wasn't ashamed of pa. i wouldn't be as long as he behaved. he would find out about the high school as i had found out about the lambert boys across the hill.in the afternoon when we went to biology pa was in the class. he was sitting on one of the high stools beside the microscope. we went ahead with our work just as if pa wasn't in the class. i saw- pa take his knife and scrape tartar from one of his teeth. professor herbert put it on the lens and adjusted the microscope for pa. he adjusted it and worked awhile. then he says: "now luster, look! put your eye right down to the light. squint the other eye!"pa put his head down and did as professor herbert said. "i see 'im," says pa. 'who'd a ever thought that? right on a body's teeth! right in a body's mouth. you're right certain they ain't no fake to this, professor herbert?""no, luster," says professor herbert. "it's there. that's the germ. germs live in a worid we cannot see with the naked eye. we must use the microscope. there are millions of them in our bodies. some are harmful. others are helpful."pa holds his face down and looks through the microscope. we stop and watch pa. he sits upon the tall stool. his knees are against the table. his legs are long. his coat slips up behind when he bends over. the handle of his gun shows. professor herbert pulls his coat down quickly."oh, yes," says pa. he gets up and pulls his coat down. pa's face gets a little red. he knows about his gun and he knows he doesn't have any use for it in high school."we have a big black snake over here we caught yesterday," says professor herbert. "we'll chloroform him and dissect him and show you he has germs in his body, too.""don't do it," says pa. "i believe you. i jist don't want to see you kill the black snake. i never kill one. they are good mousers and a lot o' help to us on the farm. i like black snakes. i jist hate to see people kill 'em. i don't allow 'em killed on my place."the students look at pa. they seem to like him better after he said that. pa with a gun in his pocket but a tender heart beneath his ribs for snakes, but not for man! pa won't whip a mule at home. he won't whip his cattle."man can defend hisself," says pa, "but cattle and mules can't. we have the drop on 'em. ain't nothin' to a man that'll beat a good pullin' mule. he ain't got th' right kind o' a heart!"professor herbert took pa through the laboratory. he showed him the different kinds of work we were doing. he showed him our equipment. they stood and talked while we worked. then they walked out together. they talked louder when they got out in the hall.when our biology class was over i walked out of the room. it was our last class for the day. i would have to take my broom and sweep two hours to finish paying for the split cherry tree. i just wondered if pa would want me to stay. he was standing in the hallway watching the students march out. he looked lost among us. he looked like a leaf turned brown on the tree among the treetop filled with growing leaves.i got my broom and started to sweep. professor herbert walked up and says, "i'm going to let you do that some other time. you can go home with your father. he is waiting out there."i iaid my broom down, got my books, and went down the steps.pa says, "ain't you got two hours o' sweepin' yet to do?"i says, "professor herbert said i could do it some other time. he said for me to go home with you.""no," says pa. "you are goin' to do as he says. he's a good man. school has changed from my day and time. i'm a dead leaf, dave. i'm behind. i don't belong here. if he'll let me i'll get a broom and we'll both sweep one hour. that pays your debt. i'll hep you pay it. i'll ast 'im and see if he won't let me hep you.""i'm going to cancel the debt," says professor herbert. "i just wanted you to understand, luster.""i understand," says pa, "and since i understand he must pay his debt fer th' tree and i'm goin' to hep 'im.""don't do that," says professor herbert. "it's all on me.""we don't do things like that," says pa, "we're just and honest people. we don't want somethin' fer nothin'. professor herbert, you're wrong now and i'm right. you'll haf to listen to me. i've larned a lot from you. my boy must go on. th' worid has left me. it changed while i've raised my family and plowed th' hills. i'm a just and honest man. i don' skip debts. i ain't larned 'em to do that. i ain't got much larnin' myself but i do know right from wrong atter i see through a thing."professor herbert went home. pa and i stayed and swept one hour. it looked funny to see pa use a broom. he never used one at home. mom used the broom. pa used the plow. pa did hard work. pa says, "i can't sweep. durned if i can. look at th' streaks o' dirt i leave on th' floor! seems like no work a-tall fer me. brooms is too light 'r somethin'. i'll jist do th' best i can, dave. i've been wrong about th' school."i says, "did you know professor herbert can get a warrant out for you for bringing your pistoi to school and showing it in his office! they can railroad you for that!""that's all made right," says pa. "i've made that right. professor herbert ain't goin' to take it to court. he likes me. i like 'im. we jist had to get together. he had the remedies. he showed me. you must go on to school. i am as strong a man as ever come out'n th' hills fer my years and th' hard work i've done. but i'm behind, dave. i'm a little man. your hands will be softer than mine. your clothes will be better. you'll allus look cleaner than your old pap. jist remember, dave, to pay your debts and be honest. jist be kind to animals and don't bother th' snakes. that's all i got agin th' school. puttin' black snakes to sleep and cuttin' 'em open."it was late when we got home. stars were in the sky. the moon was up. the ground was frozen. pa took his time going home. i couldn't run like i did the night before. it was ten o'clock before we got the work finished, our suppers eaten. pa sat before the fire and told mom he was going to take her and show her a germ sometime. mom hadn't seen one either. pa told her about the high school and the fine man professor herbert was. he told mom about the strange school across the hill and how different it was from the school in their day and time.one christmas was so much like another, in those years around the sea-town corner now and out of all sound except the distant speaking of the voices i sometimes hear a moment before sleep, that i can never remember whether it snowed for six days and six nights when i was twelve or whether it snowed for twelve days and twelve nights when i was six.all the christmases roll down toward the two-tongued sea, like a cold and headlong moon bundling down the sky that was our street; and they stop at the rim of the ice-edged fish-freezing waves, and i plunge my hands in the snow and bring out whatever i can find. in goes my hand into that wool-white bell-tongued ball of holidays resting at the rim of the carol-singing sea, and out come mrs. prothero and the firemen.it was on the afternoon of the christmas eve, and i was in mrs. prothero's garden, waiting for cats, with her son jim. it was snowing. it was always snowing at christmas. december, in my memory, is white as lapland, though there were no reindeers. but there were cats. patient, cold and callous, our hands wrapped in socks, we waited to snowball the cats. sleek and long as jaguars and horrible-whiskered, spitting and snarling, they would slink and sidle over the white back-garden walls, and the lynx-eyed hunters, jim and i, fur-capped and moccasined trappers from hudson bay, off mumbles road, would hurl our deadly snowballs at the green of their eyes. the wise cats never appeared.we were so still, eskimo-footed arctic marksmen in the muffling silence of the eternal snows--eternal, ever since wednesday--that we never heard mrs. prothero's first cry from her igloo at the bottom of the garden. or, if we heard it at all, it was, to us, like the far-off challenge of our enemy and prey, the neighbor's polar cat. but soon the voice grew louder."fire!" cried mrs. prothero, and she beat the dinner-gong.and we ran down the garden, with the snowballs in our arms, toward the house; and smoke, indeed, was pouring out of the dining-room, and the gong was bombilating, and mrs. prothero was announcing ruin like a town crier in pompeii. this was better than all the cats in wales standing on the wall in a row. we bounded into the house, laden with snowballs, and stopped at the open door of the smoke-filled room.something was burning all right; perhaps it was mr. prothero, who always slept there after midday dinner with a newspaper over his face. but he was standing in the middle of the room, saying, "a fine christmas!" and smacking at the smoke with a slipper."call the fire brigade," cried mrs. prothero as she beat the gong. "there won't be there," said mr. prothero, "it's christmas." there was no fire to be seen, only clouds of smoke and mr. prothero standing in the middle of them, waving his slipper as though he were conducting."do something," he said. and we threw all our snowballs into the smoke - i think we missed mr. prothero - and ran out of the house to the telephone box."let's call the police as well," jim said. "and the ambulance." "and ernie jenkins, he likes fires."but we only called the fire brigade, and soon the fire engine came and three tall men in helmets brought a hose into the house and mr. prothero got out just in time before they turned it on. nobody could have had a noisier christmas eve. and when the firemen turned off the hose and were standing in the wet, smoky room, jim's aunt, miss. prothero, came downstairs and peered in at them. jim and i waited, very quietly, to hear what she would say to them. she said the right thing, always. she looked at the three tall firemen in their shining helmets, standing among the smoke and cinders and dissolving snowballs, and she said, "would you like anything to read?"years and years ago, when i was a boy, when there were wolves in wales, and birds the color of red-flannel petticoats whisked past the harp-shaped hills, when we sang and wallowed all night and day in caves that smelt like sunday afternoons in damp front farmhouse parlors, and we chased, with the jawbones of deacons, the english and the bears, before the motor car, before the wheel, before the duchess-faced horse, when we rode the daft and happy hills bareback, it snowed and it snowed. but here a small boy says: "it snowed last year, too. i made a snowman and my brother knocked it down and i knocked my brother down and then we had tea.""but that was not the same snow," i say. "our snow was not only shaken from white wash buckets down the sky, it came shawling out of the ground and swam and drifted out of the arms and hands and bodies of the trees; snow grew overnight on the roofs of the houses like a pure and grandfather moss, minutely ivied the walls and settled on the postman, opening the gate, like a dumb, numb thunder-storm of white, torn christmas cards.""were there postmen then, too?""with sprinkling eyes and wind-cherried noses, on spread, frozen feet they crunched up to the doors and mittened on them manfully. but all that the children could hear was a ringing of bells.""you mean that the postman went rat-a-tat-tat and the doors rang?""i mean that the bells the children could hear were inside them.""i only hear thunder sometimes, never bells.""there were church bells, too.""inside them?""no, no, no, in the bat-black, snow-white belfries, tugged by bishops and storks. and they rang their tidings over the bandaged town, over the frozen foam of the powder and ice-cream hills, over the crackling sea. it seemed that all the churches boomed for joy under my window; and the weathercocks crew for christmas, on our fence.""get back to the postmen.""they were just ordinary postmen, found of walking and dogs and christmas and the snow. they knocked on the doors with blue knuckles. . . .""ours has got a black knocker. . . .""and then they stood on the white welcome mat in the little, drifted porches and huffed and puffed, making ghosts with their breath, and jogged from foot to foot like small boys wanting to go out.""and then the presents?""and then the presents, after the christmas box. and the cold postman, with a rose on his button-nose, tingled down the tea-tray-slithered run of the chilly glinting hill. he went in his ice-bound boots like a man on fishmonger's slabs."he wagged his bag like a frozen camel's hump, dizzily turned the corner on one foot, and, by god, he was gone.""get back to the presents.""there were the useful presents: engulfing mufflers of the old coach days, and mittens made for giant sloths; zebra scarfs of a substance like silky gum that could be tug-o'-warred down to the galoshes; blinding tam-o'-shanters like patchwork tea cozies and bunny-suited busbies and balaclavas for victims of head-shrinking tribes; from aunts who always wore wool next to the skin there were mustached and rasping vests that made you wonder why the aunts had any skin left at all; and once i had a little crocheted nose bag from an aunt now, alas, no longer whinnying with us. and pictureless books in which small boys, though warned with quotations not to, would skate on farmer giles' pond and did and drowned; and books that told me everything about the wasp, except why.""go on the useless presents.""bags of moist and many-colored jelly babies and a folded flag and a false nose and a tram-conductor's cap and a machine that punched tickets and rang a bell; never a catapult; once, by mistake that no one could explain, a little hatchet; and a celluloid duck that made, when you pressed it, a most unducklike sound, a mewing moo that an ambitious cat might make who wished to be a cow; and a painting book in which i could make the grass, the trees, the sea and the animals any colour i pleased, and still the dazzling sky-blue sheep are grazing in the red field under the rainbow-billed and pea-green birds. hardboileds, toffee, fudge and allsorts, crunches, cracknels, humbugs, glaciers, marzipan, and butterwelsh for the welsh. and troops of bright tin soldiers who, if they could not fight, could always run. and snakes-and-families and happy ladders. and easy hobbi-games for little engineers, complete with instructions. oh, easy for leonardo! and a whistle to make the dogs bark to wake up the old man next door to make him beat on the wall with his stick to shake our picture off the wall. and a packet of cigarettes: you put one in your mouth and you stood at the corner of the street and you waited for hours, in vain, for an old lady to scold you for smoking a cigarette, and then with a smirk you ate it. and then it was breakfast under the balloons.""were there uncles like in our house?""there are always uncles at christmas. the same uncles. and on christmas morning, with dog-disturbing whistle and sugar fags, i would scour the swatched town for the news of the little world, and find always a dead bird by the post office or by the white deserted swings; perhaps a robin, all but one of his fires out. men and women wading or scooping back from chapel, with taproom noses and wind-bussed cheeks, all albinos, huddles their stiff black jarring feathers against the irreligious snow. mistletoe hung from the gas brackets in all the front parlors; there was sherry and walnuts and bottled beer and crackers by the dessertspoons; and cats in their fur-abouts watched the fires; and the high-heaped fire spat, all ready for the chestnuts and the mulling pokers. some few large men sat in the front parlors, without their collars, uncles almost certainly, trying their new cigars, holding them out judiciously at arms' length, returning them to their mouths, coughing, then holding them out again as though waiting for the explosion; and some few small aunts, not wanted in the kitchen, nor anywhere else for that matter, sat on the very edge of their chairs, poised and brittle, afraid to break, like faded cups and saucers."not many those mornings trod the piling streets: an old man always, fawn-bowlered, yellow-gloved and, at this time of year, with spats of snow, would take his constitutional to the white bowling green and back, as he would take it wet or fire on christmas day or doomsday; sometimes two hale young men, with big pipes blazing, no overcoats and wind blown scarfs, would trudge, unspeaking, down to the forlorn sea, to work up an appetite, to blow away the fumes, who knows, to walk into the waves until nothing of them was left but the two furling smoke clouds of their inextinguishable briars. then i would be slap-dashing home, the gravy smell of the dinners of others, the bird smell, the brandy, the pudding and mince, coiling up to my nostrils, when out of a snow-clogged side lane would come a boy the spit of myself, with a pink-tipped cigarette and the violet past of a black eye, cocky as a bullfinch, leering all to himself.i hated him on sight and sound, and would be about to put my dog whistle to my lips and blow him off the face of christmas when suddenly he, with a violet wink, put his whistle to his lips and blew so stridently, so high, so exquisitely loud, that gobbling faces, their cheeks bulged with goose, would press against their tinsled windows, the whole length of the white echoing street. for dinner we had turkey and blazing pudding, and after dinner the uncles sat in front of the fire, loosened all buttons, put their large moist hands over their watch chains, groaned a little and slept. mothers, aunts and sisters scuttled to and fro, bearing tureens. auntie bessie, who had already been frightened, twice, by a clock-work mouse, whimpered at the sideboard and had some elderberry wine. the dog was sick. auntie dosie had to have three aspirins, but auntie hannah, who liked port, stood in the middle of the snowbound back yard, singing like a big-bosomed thrush. i would blow up balloons to see how big they would blow up to; and, when they burst, which they all did, the uncles jumped and rumbled. in the rich and heavy afternoon, the uncles breathing like dolphins and the snow descending, i would sit among festoons and chinese lanterns and nibble dates and try to make a model man-o'-war, following the instructions for little engineers, and produce what might be mistaken for a sea-going tramcar.or i would go out, my bright new boots squeaking, into the white world, on to the seaward hill, to call on jim and dan and jack and to pad through the still streets, leaving huge footprints on the hidden pavements."i bet people will think there's been hippos.""what would you do if you saw a hippo coming down our street?""i'd go like this, bang! i'd throw him over the railings and roll him down the hill and then i'd tickle him under the ear and he'd wag his tail.""what would you do if you saw two hippos?"iron-flanked and bellowing he-hippos clanked and battered through the scudding snow toward us as we passed mr. daniel's house."let's post mr. daniel a snow-ball through his letter box.""let's write things in the snow.""let's write, 'mr. daniel looks like a spaniel' all over his lawn."or we walked on the white shore. "can the fishes see it's snowing?"the silent one-clouded heavens drifted on to the sea. now we were snow-blind travelers lost on the north hills, and vast dewlapped dogs, with flasks round their necks, ambled and shambled up to us, baying "excelsior."we returned home through the poor streets where only a few children fumbled with bare red fingers in the wheel-rutted snow and cat-called after us, their voices fading away, as we trudged uphill, into the cries of the dock birds and the hooting of ships out in the whirling bay. and then, at tea the recovered uncles would be jolly; and the ice cake loomed in the center of the table like a marble grave. auntie hannah laced her tea with rum, because it was only once a year.bring out the tall tales now that we told by the fire as the gaslight bubbled like a diver. ghosts whooed like owls in the long nights when i dared not look over my shoulder; animals lurked in the cubbyhole under the stairs and the gas meter ticked. and i remember that we went singing carols once, when there wasn't the shaving of a moon to light the flying streets.at the end of a long road was a drive that led to a large house, and we stumbled up the darkness of the drive that night, each one of us afraid, each one holding a stone in his hand in case, and all of us too brave to say a word. the wind through the trees made noises as of old and unpleasant and maybe webfooted men wheezing in caves. we reached the black bulk of the house. "what shall we give them? hark the herald?""no," jack said, "good king wencelas. i'll count three." one, two three, and we began to sing, our voices high and seemingly distant in the snow-felted darkness round the house that was occupied by nobody we knew.we stood close together, near the dark door. good king wencelas looked out on the feast of stephen . . . and then a small, dry voice, like the voice of someone who has not spoken for a long time, joined our singing: a small, dry, eggshell voice from the other side of the door: a small dry voice through the keyhole. and when we stopped running we were outside our house; the front room was lovely; balloons floated under the hot-water-bottle-gulping gas; everything was good again and shone over the town."perhaps it was a ghost," jim said. "perhaps it was trolls," dan said, who was always reading."let's go in and see if there's any jelly left," jack said. and we did that.always on christmas night there was music. an uncle played the fiddle, a cousin sang "cherry ripe," and another uncle sang "drake's drum." it was very warm in the little house. auntie hannah, who had got on to the parsnip wine, sang a song about bleeding hearts and death, and then another in which she said her heart was like a bird's nest; and then everybody laughed again; and then i went to bed. looking through my bedroom window, out into the moonlight and the unending smoke-colored snow, i could see the lights in the windows of all the other houses on our hill and hear the music rising from them up the long, steady falling night. i turned the gas down, i got into bed. i said some words to the close and holy darkness, and then i slept.two or three persons having at different times intimated that if i would write an autobiography they would read it when they got leisure, i yield at last to this frenzied public demand and herewith tender my history.ours is a noble house, and stretches a long way back into antiquity. the earliest ancestor the twains have any record of was a friend of the family by the name of higgins. this was in the eleventh century, when our people were living in aberdeen, county of cork, england. why it is that our long line has ever since borne the maternal name except when one of them now and then took a playful refuge in an alias to avert foolishness, instead of higgins, is a mystery which none of us has ever felt much desire to stir. it is a kind of vague, pretty romance, and we leave it alone. all the old families do that way.arthour twain was a man of considerable note--a solicitor on the highway in william rufus's time. at about the age of thirty he went to one of those fine old english places of resort called newgate, to see about something, and never returned again. while there he died suddenly.augustus twain seems to have made something of a stir about the year 1160. he was as full of fun as he could be, and used to take his old saber and sharpen it up, and get in a convenient place on a dark night, and stick it through people as they went by, to see them jump. he was a born humorist. but he got to going too far with it; and the first time he was found stripping one of these parties, the authorities removed one end of him, and put it up on a nice high place on temple bar, where it could contemplate the people and have a good time. he never liked any situation so much or stuck to it so long.then for the next two hundred years the family tree shows a succession of soldiers--noble, high-spirited fellows, who always went into battle singing, right behind the army, and always went out a-whooping, right ahead of it.this is a scathing rebuke to old dead froissart's poor witticism that our family tree never had but one limb to it, and that that one stuck out at right angles, and bore fruit winter and summer.early in the fifteenth century we have beau twain, called "the scholar." he wrote a beautiful, beautiful hand. and he could imitate anybody's hand so closely that it was enough to make a person laugh his head off to see it. he had infinite sport with his talent. but by and by he took a contract to break stone for a road, and the roughness of the work spoiled his hand. still, he enjoyed life all the time he was in the stone business, which, with inconsiderable intervals, was some forty-two years. in fact, he died in harness. during all those long years he gave such satisfaction that he never was through with one contract a week till the government gave him another. he was a perfect pet. and he was always a favorite with his fellow-artists, and was a conspicuous member of their benevolent secret society, called the chain gang. he always wore his hair short, had a preference for striped clothes, and died lamented by the government. he was a sore loss to his country. for he was so regular.some years later we have the illustrious john morgan twain. he came over to this country with columbus in 1492 as a passenger. he appears to have been of a crusty, uncomfortable disposition. he complained of the food all the way over, and was always threatening to go ashore unless there was a change. he wanted fresh shad. hardly a day passed over his head that he did not go idling about the ship with his nose in the air, sneering about the commander, and saying he did not believe columbus knew where he was going to or had ever been there before. the memorable cry of "land ho!" thrilled every heart in the ship but his. he gazed awhile through a piece of smoked glass at the penciled line lying on the distant water, and then said: "land be hanged--it's a raft!"when this questionable passenger came on board the ship, be brought nothing with him but an old newspaper containing a handkerchief marked "b. g.," one cotton sock marked "l. w. c.," one woolen one marked "d. f.," and a night-shirt marked "o. m. r." and yet during the voyage he worried more about his "trunk," and gave himself more airs about it, than all the rest of the passengers put together. if the ship was "down by the head," and would not steer, he would go and move his "trunk" further aft, and then watch the effect. if the ship was "by the stern," he would suggest to columbus to detail some men to "shift that baggage." in storms he had to be gagged, because his wailings about his "trunk" made it impossible for the men to hear the orders. the man does not appear to have been openly charged with any gravely unbecoming thing, but it is noted in the ship's log as a "curious circumstance" that albeit he brought his baggage on board the ship in a newspaper, he took it ashore in four trunks, a queensware crate, and a couple of champagne baskets. but when he came back insinuating, in an insolent, swaggering way, that some of this things were missing, and was going to search the other passengers' baggage, it was too much, and they threw him overboard. they watched long and wonderingly for him to come up, but not even a bubble rose on the quietly ebbing tide. but while every one was most absorbed in gazing over the side, and the interest was momentarily increasing, it was observed with consternation that the vessel was adrift and the anchor-cable hanging limp from the bow. then in the ship's dimmed and ancient log we find this quaint note:"in time it was discouvered yt ye troblesome passenger hadde gone downe and got ye anchor, and toke ye same and solde it to ye dam sauvages from ye interior, saying yt he hadde founde it, ye sonne of a ghun!"yet this ancestor had good and noble instincts, and it is with pride that we call to mind the fact that he was the first white person who ever interested himself in the work of elevating and civilizing our indians. he built a commodious jail and put up a gallows, and to his dying day he claimed with satisfaction that he had had a more restraining and elevating influence on the indians than any other reformer that ever labored among them. at this point the chronicle becomes less frank and chatty, and closes abruptly by saying that the old voyager went to see his gallows perform on the first white man ever hanged in america, and while there received injuries which terminated in his death.the great-grandson of the "reformer" flourished in sixteen hundred and something, and was known in our annals as "the old admiral," though in history he had other titles. he was long in command of fleets of swift vessels, well armed and manned, and did great service in hurrying up merchantmen. vessels which he followed and kept his eagle eye on, always made good fair time across the ocean. but if a ship still loitered in spite of all he could do, his indignation would grow till he could contain himself no longer-- and then he would take that ship home where he lived and keep it there carefully, expecting the owners to come for it, but they never did. and he would try to get the idleness and sloth out of the sailors of that ship by compelling them to take invigorating exercise and a bath. he called it "walking a plank." all the pupils liked it. at any rate, they never found any fault with it after trying it. when the owners were late coming for their ships, the admiral always burned them, so that the insurance money should not be lost. at last this fine old tar was cut down in the fullness of his years and honors. and to her dying day, his poor heart-broken widow believed that if he had been cut down fifteen minutes sooner he might have been resuscitated.charles henry twain lived during the latter part of the seventeenth century, and was a zealous and distinguished missionary. he converted sixteen thousand south sea islanders, and taught them that a dog-tooth necklace and a pair of spectacles was not enough clothing to come to divine service in. his poor flock loved him very, very dearly; and when his funeral was over, they got up in a body and came out of the restaurant with tears in their eyes, and saying, one to another, that he was a good tender missionary, and they wished they had some more of him.pah-go-to-wah-wah-pukketekeewis mighty-hunter-with-a-hog-eye-twain adorned the middle of the eighteenth century, and aided general braddock with all his heart to resist the oppressor washington. it was this ancestor who fired seventeen times at our washington from behind a tree. so far the beautiful romantic narrative in the moral story-books is correct; but when that narrative goes on to say that at the seventeenth round the awe-stricken savage said solemnly that that man was being reserved by the great spirit for some mighty mission, and he dared not lift his sacrilegious rifle against him again, the narrative seriously impairs the integrity of history. what he did say was:it ain't no hic no use. 'at man's so drunk he can't stan' still long enough for a man to hit him. i hic i can't 'ford to fool away any more am'nition on him."that was why he stopped at the seventeenth round, and it was a good, plain, matter-of-fact reason, too, and one that easily commends itself to us by the eloquent, persuasive flavor of probability there is about it.i also enjoyed the story-book narrative, but i felt a marring misgiving that every indian at braddock's defeat who fired at a soldier a couple of times two easily grows to seventeen in a century, and missed him, jumped to the conclusion that the great spirit was reserving that soldier for some grand mission; and so i somehow feared that the only reason why washington's case is remembered and the others forgotten is, that in his the prophecy came true, and in that of the others it didn't. there are not books enough on earth to contain the record of the prophecies indians and other unauthorized parties have made; but one may carry in his overcoat pockets the record of all the prophecies that have been fulfilled.i will remark here, in passing, that certain ancestors of mine are so thoroughly well-known in history by their aliases, that i have not felt it to be worth while to dwell upon them, or even mention them in the order of their birth. among these may be mentioned richard brinsley twain, alias guy fawkes; john wentworth twain, alias sixteen-string jack; william hogarth twain, alias jack sheppard; ananias twain, alias baron munchausen; john george twain, alias captain kydd; and then there are george francis twain, tom pepper, nebuchadnezzar, and baalam's ass--they all belong to our family, but to a branch of it somewhat distinctly removed from the honorable direct line--in fact, a collateral branch, whose members chiefly differ from the ancient stock in that, in order to acquire the notoriety we have always yearned and hungered for, they have got into a low way of going to jail instead of getting hanged.it is not well, when writing an autobiography, to follow your ancestry down too close to your own time--it is safest to speak only vaguely of your great-grandfather, and then skip from there to yourself, which i now do.i was born without teeth--and there richard iii. had the advantage of me; but i was born without a humpback, likewise, and there i had the advantage of him. my parents were neither very poor nor conspicuously honest.but now a thought occurs to me. my own history would really seem so tame contrasted with that of my ancestors, that it is simply wisdom to leave it unwritten until i am hanged. if some other biographies i have read had stopped with the ancestry until a like event occurred, it would have been a felicitous thing for the reading public. how does it strike you?i found that a person of large intelligence could read this beautiful language with considerable facility without a dictionary, but i presently found that to such a parson a grammar could be of use at times. it is because, if he does not know the were's and the was's and the maybe's and the has-beens's apart, confusions and uncertainties can arise. he can get the idea that a thing is going to happen next week when the truth is that it has already happened week before last. even more previously, sometimes. examination and inquiry showed me that the adjectives and such things were frank and fair-minded and straightforward, and did not shuffle; it was the verb that mixed the hands, it was the verb that lacked stability, it was the verb that had no permanent opinion about anything, it was the verb that was always dodging the issue and putting out the light and making all the trouble.further examination, further inquiry, further reflection, confirmed this judgment, and established beyond peradventure the fact that the verb was the storm-center. this discovery made plain the right and wise course to pursue in order to acquire certainty and exactness in understanding the statements which the newspaper was daily endeavoring to convey to me: i must catch a verb and tame it. i must find out its ways, i must spot its eccentricities, i must penetrate its disguises, i must intelligently foresee and forecast at least the commoner of the dodges it was likely to try upon a stranger in given circumstances, i must get in on its main shifts and head them off, i must learn its game and play the limit.i had noticed, in other foreign languages, that verbs are bred in families, and that the members of each family have certain features or resemblances that are common to that family and distinguish it from the other families--the other kin, the cousins and what not. i had noticed that this family-mark is not usually the nose or the hair, so to speak, but the tail--the termination--and that these tails are quite definitely differentiated; insomuch that an expert can tell a pluperfect from a subjunctive by its tail as easily and as certainly as a cowboy can tell a cow from a horse by the like process, the result of observation and culture. i should explain that i am speaking of legitimate verbs, those verbs which in the slang of the grammar are called regular. there are other--i am not meaning to conceal this; others called irregulars, born out of wedlock, of unknown and uninteresting parentage, and naturally destitute of family resemblances, as regards to all features, tails included. but of these pathetic outcasts i have nothing to say. i do not approve of them, i do not encourage them; i am prudishly delicate and sensitive, and i do not allow them to be used in my presence.but, as i have said, i decided to catch one of the others and break it into harness. one is enough. once familiar with its assortment of tails, you are immune; after that, no regular verb can conceal its specialty from you and make you think it is working the past or the future or the conditional or the unconditional when it is engaged in some other line of business--its tail will give it away. i found out all these things by myself, without a teacher.i selected the verb amare, to love. not for any personal reason, for i am indifferent about verbs; i care no more for one verb than for another, and have little or no respect for any of them; but in foreign languages you always begin with that one. why, i don't know. it is merely habit, i suppose; the first teacher chose it, adam was satisfied, and there hasn't been a successor since with originality enough to start a fresh one. for they are a pretty limited lot, you will admit that? originality is not in their line; they can't think up anything new, anything to freshen up the old moss-grown dullness of the language lesson and put life and "go" into it, and charm and grace and picturesqueness.i knew i must look after those details myself; therefore i thought them out and wrote them down, and set for the facchino and explained them to him, and said he must arrange a proper plant, and get together a good stock company among the contadini, and design the costumes, and distribute the parts; and drill the troupe, and be ready in three days to begin on this verb in a shipshape and workman-like manner. i told him to put each grand division of it under a foreman, and each subdivision under a subordinate of the rank of sergeant or corporal or something like that, and to have a different uniform for each squad, so that i could tell a pluperfect from a compound future without looking at the book; the whole battery to be under his own special and particular command, with the rank of brigadier, and i to pay the freight.i then inquired into the character and possibilities of the selected verb, and was much disturbed to find that it was over my size, it being chambered for fifty-seven rounds--fifty-seven ways of saying i love without reloading; and yet none of them likely to convince a girl that was laying for a title, or a title that was laying for rocks.it seemed to me that with my inexperience it would be foolish to go into action with this mitrailleuse, so i ordered it to the rear and told the facchino to provide something a little more primitive to start with, something less elaborate, some gentle old-fashioned flint-lock, smooth-bore, double-barreled thing, calculated to cripple at two hundred yards and kill at forty--an arrangement suitable for a beginner who could be satisfied with moderate results on the offstart and did not wish to take the whole territory in the first campaign.but in vain. he was not able to mend the matter, all the verbs being of the same build, all gatlings, all of the same caliber and delivery, fifty-seven to the volley, and fatal at a mile and a half. but he said the auxiliary verb avere, to have, was a tidy thing, and easy to handle in a seaway, and less likely to miss stays in going about than some of the others; so, upon his recommendation i chose that one, and told him to take it along and scrape its bottom and break out its spinnaker and get it ready for business.i will explain that a facchino is a general-utility domestic. mine was a horse-doctor in his better days, and a very good one.at the end of three days the facchino-doctor-brigadier was ready. i was also ready, with a stenographer. we were in a room called the rope-walk. this is a formidably long room, as is indicated by its facetious name, and is a good place for reviews. at 9:30 the f.-d.-b. took his place near me and gave the word of command; the drums began to rumble and thunder, the head of the forces appeared at an upper door, and the "march-past" was on. down they filed, a blaze of variegated color, each squad gaudy in a uniform of its own and bearing a banner inscribed with its verbal rank and quality: first the present tense in mediterranean blue and old gold, then the past definite in scarlet and black, then the imperfect in green and yellow, then the indicative future in the stars and stripes, then the old red sandstone subjunctive in purple and silver-- and so on and so on, fifty-seven privates and twenty commissioned and non-commissioned officers; certainly one of the most fiery and dazzling and eloquent sights i have ever beheld. i could not keep back the tears. presently:"halt!" commanded the brigadier."front--face!""right dress!""stand at ease!""one--two--three. in unison--recite!"it was fine. in one noble volume of sound of all the fifty-seven haves in the italian language burst forth in an exalting and splendid confusion. then came commands:"about--face! eyes--front! helm alee--hard aport! forward--march!" and the drums let go again.when the last termination had disappeared, the commander said the instruction drill would now begin, and asked for suggestions. i said:"they say i have, thou hast, he has, and so on, but they don't say what. it will be better, and more definite, if they have something to have; just an object, you know, a something--anything will do; anything that will give the listener a sort of personal as well as grammatical interest in their joys and complaints, you see."he said:"it is a good point. would a dog do?"i said i did not know, but we could try a dog and see. so he sent out an aide-de-camp to give the order to add the dog.the six privates of the present tense now filed in, in charge of sergeant avere (to have), and displaying their banner. they formed in line of battle, and recited, one at a time, thus:"io ho un cane, i have a dog.""tu hai un cane, thou hast a dog.""egli ha un cane, he has a dog.""noi abbiamo un cane, we have a dog.""voi avete un cane, you have a dog.""eglino hanno un cane, they have a dog."no comment followed. they returned to camp, and i reflected a while. the commander said:"i fear you are disappointed.""yes," i said; "they are too monotonous, too singsong, to dead-and-alive; they have no expression, no elocution. it isn't natural; it could never happen in real life. a person who had just acquired a dog is either blame' glad or blame' sorry. he is not on the fence. i never saw a case. what the nation do you suppose is the matter with these people?"he thought maybe the trouble was with the dog. he said:"these are contadini, you know, and they have a prejudice against dogs-- that is, against marimane. marimana dogs stand guard over people's vines and olives, you know, and are very savage, and thereby a grief and an inconvenience to persons who want other people's things at night. in my judgment they have taken this dog for a marimana, and have soured on him."i saw that the dog was a mistake, and not functionable: we must try something else; something, if possible, that could evoke sentiment, interest, feeling."what is cat, in italian?" i asked."gatto.""is it a gentleman cat, or a lady?""gentleman cat.""how are these people as regards that animal?""we-ll, they--they--""you hesitate: that is enough. how are they about chickens?"he tilted his eyes toward heaven in mute ecstasy. i understood."what is chicken, in italian?" i asked."pollo, podere." (podere is italian for master. it is a title of courtesy, and conveys reverence and admiration.) "pollo is one chicken by itself; when there are enough present to constitute a plural, it is polli.""very well, polli will do. which squad is detailed for duty next?""the past definite.""send out and order it to the front--with chickens. and let them understand that we don't want any more of this cold indifference."he gave the order to an aide, adding, with a haunting tenderness in his tone and a watering mouth in his aspect:"convey to them the conception that these are unprotected chickens." he turned to me, saluting with his hand to his temple, and explained, "it will inflame their interest in the poultry, sire."a few minutes elapsed. then the squad marched in and formed up, their faces glowing with enthusiasm, and the file-leader shouted:"ebbi polli, i had chickens!""good!" i said. "go on, the next.""avest polli, thou hadst chickens!""fine! next!""ebbe polli, he had chickens!""moltimoltissimo! go on, the next!""avemmo polli, we had chickens!""basta-basta aspettatto avanti--last man--charge!""ebbero polli, they had chickens!"then they formed in echelon, by columns of fours, refused the left, and retired in great style on the double-quick. i was enchanted, and said:"now, doctor, that is something like! chickens are the ticket, there is no doubt about it. what is the next squad?""the imperfect.""how does it go?""io avena, i had, tu avevi, thou hadst, egli avena, he had, noi av--"wait--we've just had the hads. what are you giving me?""but this is another breed.""what do we want of another breed? isn't one breed enough? had is had, and your tricking it out in a fresh way of spelling isn't going to make it any hadder than it was before; now you know that yourself.""but there is a distinction--they are not just the same hads.""how do you make it out?""well, you use that first had when you are referring to something that happened at a named and sharp and perfectly definite moment; you use the other when the thing happened at a vaguely defined time and in a more prolonged and indefinitely continuous way."'why, doctor, it is pure nonsense; you know it yourself. look here: if i have had a had, or have wanted to have had a had, or was in a position right then and there to have had a had that hadn't had any chance to go out hadding on account of this foolish discrimination which lets one had go hadding in any kind of indefinite grammatical weather but restricts the other one to definite and datable meteoric convulsions, and keeps it pining around and watching the barometer all the time, and liable to get sick through confinement and lack of exercise, and all that sort of thing, why--why, the inhumanity of it is enough, let alone the wanton superfluity and uselessness of any such a loafing consumptive hospital-bird of a had taking up room and cumbering the place for nothing. these finical refinements revolt me; it is not right, it is not honorable; it is constructive nepotism to keep in office a had that is so delicate it can't come out when the wind's in the nor'west--i won't have this dude on the payroll. cancel his exequator; and look here--""but you miss the point. it is like this. you see--""never mind explaining, i don't care anything about it. six hads is enough for me; anybody that needs twelve, let him subscribe; i don't want any stock in a had trust. knock out the prolonged and indefinitely continuous; four-fifths of it is water, anyway.""but i beg you, podere! it is often quite indispensable in cases where--""pipe the next squad to the assault!"but it was not to be; for at that moment the dull boom of the noon gun floated up out of far-off florence, followed by the usual softened jangle of church-bells, florentine and suburban, that bursts out in murmurous response; by labor-union law the colazione [1] must stop; stop promptly, stop instantly, stop definitely, like the chosen and best of the breed of hads.- - -1. colazione is italian for a collection, a meeting, a seance, a sitting.--m.t.you have heard from a great many people who did something in the war, is it not fair and right that you listen a little moment to one who started out to do something in it but didn't? thousands entered the war, got just a taste of it, and then stepped out again permanently. these, by their very numbers, are respectable and therefore entitled to a sort of voice, not a loud one, but a modest one, not a boastful one but an apologetic one. they ought not be allowed much space among better people, people who did something. i grant that, but they ought at least be allowed to state why they didn't do anything and also to explain the process by which they didn't do anything. surely this kind of light must have some sort of value.out west there was a good deal of confusion in men's minds during the first months of the great trouble, a good deal of unsettledness, of leaning first this way then that, and then the other way. it was hard for us to get our bearings. i call to mind an example of this. i was piloting on the mississippi when the news came that south carolina had gone out of the union on the 20th of december, 1860. my pilot mate was a new yorker. he was strong for the union; so was i. but he would not listen to me with any patience, my loyalty was smirched, to his eye, because my father had owned slaves. i said in palliation of this dark fact that i had heard my father say, some years before he died, that slavery was a great wrong and he would free the solitary negro he then owned if he could think it right to give away the property of the family when he was so straitened in means. my mate retorted that a mere impulse was nothing, anyone could pretend to a good impulse, and went on decrying my unionism and libelling my ancestry. a month later the secession atmosphere had considerably thickened on the lower mississippi and i became a rebel; so did he. we were together in new orleans the 26th of january, when louisiana went out of the union. he did his fair share of the rebel shouting but was opposed to letting me do mine. he said i came of bad stock, of a father who had been willing to set slaves free. in the following summer he was piloting a union gunboat and shouting for the union again and i was in the confederate army. i held his note for some borrowed money. he was one of the most upright men i ever knew but he repudiated that note without hesitation because i was a rebel and the son of a man who owned slaves.in that summer of 1861 the first wash of the wave of war broke upon the shores of missouri. our state was invaded by the union forces. they took possession of st. louis, jefferson barracks, and some other points. the governor, calib jackson, issued his proclamation calling out fifty thousand militia to repel the invader.i was visiting in the small town where my boyhood had been spent, hannibal, marion county. several of us got together in a secret place by night and formed ourselves into a military company. one tom lyman, a young fellow of a good deal of spirit but of no military experience, was made captain; i was made second lieutenant. we had no first lieutenant, i do not know why, it was so long ago. there were fifteen of us. by the advice of an innocent connected with the organization we called ourselves the marion rangers. i do not remember that anyone found fault with the name. i did not, i thought it sounded quite well. the young fellow who proposed this title was perhaps a fair sample of the kind of stuff we were made of. he was young, ignorant, good natured, well meaning, trivial, full of romance, and given to reading chivalric novels and singing forlorn love ditties. he had some pathetic little nickel plated aristocratic instincts and detested his name, which was dunlap, detested it partly because it was nearly as common in that region as smith but mainly because it had a plebian sound to his ears. so he tried to ennoble it by writing it in this way; d'unlap. that contented his eye but left his ear unsatisfied, for people gave the new name the same old pronunciation, emphasis on the front end of it. he then did the bravest thing that can be imagined, a thing to make one shiver when one remembers how the world is given to resenting shams and affectations, he began to write his name so; d'un'lap. and he waited patiently through the long storm of mud that was flung at his work of art and he had his reward at last, for he lived to see that name accepted and the emphasis put where he wanted it put by people who had known him all his life, and to whom the tribe of dunlaps had been as familiar as the rain and the sunshine for forty years. so sure of victory at last is the courage that can wait. he said he had found by consulting some ancient french chronicles that the name was rightly and originally written d'un'lap and said that if it were translated into english it would mean peterson, lap, latin or greek, he said, for stone or rock, same as the french pierre, that is to say, peter, d' of or from, un, a or one, hence d'un'lap, of or from a stone or a peter, that is to say, one who is the son of a stone, the son of a peter, peterson. our militia company were not learned and the explanation confused them, so they called him peterson dunlap. he proved useful to us in his way, he named our camps for us and generally struck a name that was "no slouch" as the boys said.that is one sample of us. another was ed stevens, son of the town jeweller, trim built, handsome, graceful, neat as a cat, bright, educated, but given over entirely to fun. there was nothing serious in life to him. as far as he was concerned, this military expedition of ours was simply a holiday. i should say about half of us looked upon it in much the same way, not consciously perhaps, but unconsciously. we did not think, we were not capable of it. as for myself, i was full of unreasoning joy to be done with turning out of bed at midnight and four in the morning, for a while grateful to have a change, new scenes, new occupations, a new interest. in my thoughts that was as far as i went. i did not go into the details, as a rule, one doesn't at twenty four.another sample was smith, the blacksmith's apprentice. this vast donkey had some pluck, of a slow and sluggish nature, but a soft heart. at one time he would knock a horse down fro some impropriety and at another he would get homesick and cry. however, he had one ultimate credit to his account which some of us hadn't. he stuck to the war and was killed in battle at last.joe bowers, another sample, was a huge, good natured, flax headed lubber, lazy, sentimental, full of harmless brag, a grumbler by nature, an experience and industrious ambitious and often quite picturesque liar, and yet not a successful one for he had no intelligent training but was allowed to come up just anyways. this life was serious enough to him, and seldom satisfactory. but he was a good fellow anyway and the boys all liked him. he was made orderly sergeant, stevens was made corporal.these samples will answer and they are quite fair ones. well, this herd of cattle started for the war. what could you expect of them? they did as well as they knew how, but really, what was justly expected of them? nothing i should say. and that is what they did.we waited for a dark night, for caution and secrecy were necessary, then toward midnight we stole in couples and from various directions to the griggith place beyond town. from that place we set out together on foot. hannibal lies at the extreme south eastern corner of marion county, on the mississippi river. our objective point was the hamlet of new london, ten miles away in ralls county.the first hour was all fun, all idle nonsense and laughter. but that could not be kept up. the steady drudging became like work, the play had somehow oozed out of it, the stillness of the woods and the sombreness of the night began to throw a depressing influence over the spirits of the boys and presently the talking died out and each person shut himself up in his own thoughts. during the last half of the second hour nobody said a word.now we approached a log farmhouse where, according to reports, there was a guard of five union soldiers. lyman called a halt, and there, in the deep gloom of the overhanging branches, he began to whisper a plan of assault upon the house, which made the gloom more depressing than it was before. we realized with a cold suddenness that here was no jest--we were standing face to face with actual war. we were equal to the occasion. in our response there was no hesitation, no indecision. we said that if lyman wanted to meddle with those soldiers he could go ahead and do it, but if he waited for us to follow him he would wait a long time.lyman urged, pleaded, tried to shame us into it, but it had no effect. our course was plain in our minds, our minds were made up. we would flank the farmhouse, go out around. and that was what we did.we struck into the woods and entered upon a rough time, stumbling over roots, getting tangled in vines and torn by briers. at last we reached an open place in a safe region and we sat down, blown and hot, to cool off and nurse our scratches and bruises. lyman was annoyed but the rest of us were cheerful. we had flanked the farmhouse. we had made our first military movement and it was a success. we had nothing to fret about, we were feeling just the other way. horse paly and laughing began again. the expedition had become a holiday frolic once more.then we had two more hours of dull trudging and ultimate silence and depression. then about dawn, we straggled into new london, soiled, heel blistered, fagged with out little march, and all of us, except stevens, in a sour and raspy humour and privately down on the war. we stacked our shabby old shotguns in colonel ralls's barn and then went in a body and breakfasted with that veteran of the mexican war. afterward he took us to a distant meadow, and there, in the shade of a tree, we listened to an old fashioned speech from him, full of gunpowder and glory, full of that adjective piling, mixed metaphor and windy declamation which was regraded as eloquence in that ancient time and region and then he swore on a bible to be faithful to the state of missouri and drive all invaders from her soil no matter whence they may come or under what flag they might march. this mixed us considerably and we could not just make out what service we were involved in, but colonel ralls, the practised politician and phrase juggler, was not similarly in doubt. he knew quite clearly he had invested us in the cause of the southern confederacy. he closed the solemnities by belting around me the sword which his neighbour, colonel brown, had worn at beuna vista and molino del ray and he accompanied this act with another impressive blast.then we formed in line of battle and marched four hours to a shady and pleasant piece of woods on the border of a far reaching expanse of a flowery prairie. it was an enchanting region for war, our kind of war.we pierced the forest about half a mile and took up a strong position with some low and rocky hills behind us, and a purling limpid creek in front. straightaway half the command was in swimming and the other half fishing. the ass with the french name gave the position a romantic title but it was too long so the boys shortened and simplified it to camp ralls.we occupied an old maple sugar camp whose half rotted troughs were still propped against the trees. a long corn crib served fro sleeping quarters fro the battalion. on our left, half a mile away, were mason's farm and house, and he was a friend to the cause. shortly after noon the farmers began to arrive from several different directions with mules and horses for our use, and these they lent us for as long as the war might last, which, they judged, might be about three months. the animals were of all sizes all colours and all breeds. they were mainly young and frisky and nobody in the command could stay on them long at a time, for we were town boys and ignorant of horsemanship. the creature that fell to my share was a very small mule, and yet so quick and active he could throw me off without difficulty and it did this whenever i got on. then it would bray, stretching its neck out, laying its ears back and spreading its jaws till you could see down to its works. if i took it by the bridle and tried to lead it off the grounds it would sit down and brace back and no one could ever budge it. however, i was not entirely destitute of military resources and i did presently manage to spoil this game, for i had seen many a steamboat aground in my time and knew a trick or two which even a grounded mule would be obliged to respect. there was a well by the corn crib so i substituted thirty fathom of rope for the bridle and fetched him home with the windlass.i will anticipate here sufficiently to say that we did learn to ride after some days' practice, but never well. we could not learn to like our animals. they were not choice ones and most of them had annoying peculiarities of one kind or another. stevens's horse would carry him, when he was not noticing, under the huge excrescences which for on the trunks of oak trees and wipe him out of the saddle this way. stevens got several bad hurts. sergeant bowers's horse was very large and tall, slim with long legs, and looked like a railroad bridge. his size enabled him to reach all about, and as far as he wanted to go, so he was always biting bowers's legs. on the march, in the sun, bowers slept a good deal and as soon as the horse recognized he was asleep he would reach around and bite him on the leg. his legs were black and blue with bites. this was the only thing that could make him swear, but this always did, whenever his horse bit him he swore, and of course, stevens, who laughed at everything, laughed at this and would get into such convulsions over it as to lose his balance and fall off his horse, and then bowers, already irritated by the pain of the horse bite, would resent the laughter with hard language, and there would be a quarrel so that horse made no end of trouble and bad blood in the command.however, i will get back to where i was, our first afternoon in the sugar camp. the sugar troughs came very handy as horse troughs and we had plenty of corn to fill them with. i ordered sergeant bowers to feed my mule, but he said that if i reckoned he went to war to be a dry nurse to a mule it wouldn't take me very long to find out my mistake. i believed that this was insubordination but i was full of uncertainties about everything military so i let the matter pass and went and ordered smith, the blacksmith's apprentice, to feed the mule, but he merely gave me a large, cold, sarcastic grin, such as an ostensibly seven year old horse gives you when you lift up his lip and find he is fourteen, and turned his back on me. i then went to the captain and asked if it were not right and proper and military for me to have an orderly. he said it was, but as there was only one orderly in the corps, it was but right he himself should have bowers on his staff. bowers said he wouldn't serve on anyone's staff and if anybody thought he could make him, let him try. so, of course, the matter had to be dropped, there was no other way.next, nobody would cook. it was considered a degradation so we had no dinner. we lazed the rest of the pleasant afternoon away, some dozing under trees, some smoking cob pipes and talking sweethearts and war, others playing games. by late supper time all hands were famished and to meet the difficulty, all hands turned to on an equal footing, and gathered wood, built fires, and cooked the evening meal. afterward everything was smooth for a while then trouble broke out between the corporal and the sergeant, each claiming to rank the other. nobody knew which was the higher office so lyman had to settle the matter by making the rank of both officers equal. the commander of an ignorant crew like that has many troubles and vexations which probably do not occur in the regular army at all. however, with the song singing and yarn spinning around the campfire everything presently became serene again, and by and by we raked the corn down one level in one end of the crib and all went to bed on it, tying a horse to the door so he would neigh if anyone tried to get in. (it was always my impression that was always what the horse was there for and i know it was the impression of at least one other of the command, for we talked about it at the time and admired the military ingenuity of the device, but when i was out west three years ago, i was told by mr. a. g. fuqua, a member of our company, that the horse was his, that the tying him at the door was a mere matter of forgetfulness and that to attribute it to intelligent invention was to give him quite too much credit. in support of his position, he called my attention to the suggestive fact that the artifice was not employed again. i had not thought of that before.)we had some horsemanship drill every forenoon, then, afternoons, we rode off here and there in squads a few miles and visited the farmer's girls and had a youthful good time and got an honest dinner or supper, and then home again to camp, happy and content.for a time, life was idly delicious. it was perfect. there was no war to mar it. then came some farmers with an alarm one day. they said it was rumoured that the enemy were advancing in our direction from over hyde's prairie. the result was a sharp stir among us and general consternation. ir was a rude awakening from out pleasant trance. the rumour was but a rumour, nothing definite about it, so in the confusion we did not know which way to retreat. lyman was not for retreating at all in these uncertain circumstances but he found that if he tried to maintain that attitude he would fare badly, for the command were in no humour to put up with insubordination. so he yielded the point and called a council of war, to consist of himself and three other officers, but the privates made such a fuss about being left out we had to allow them to remain, for they were already present and doing most of the talking too. the question was, which way to retreat; but all were so flurried that nobody even seemed to have even a guess to offer. except lyman. he explained in a few calm words, that inasmuch as the enemy were approaching from over hyde's prairie our course was simple. all we had to do was not retreat toward him, another direction would suit our purposes perfectly. everybody saw in a moment how true this was and how wise, so lyman got a great many compliments. it was now decide that we should fall back on mason's farm.it was after dark by this time and as we could not know how soon the enemy might arrive, it did not seem best to try to take the horses and things with us, so we only took the guns and ammunition, and started at once. the route was very rough and hilly and rocky, and presently the night grew very black and rain began to fall, so we had a troublesome time of it, struggling and stumbling along in the dark and soon some person slipped and fell, and then the next person behind stumbled over him and fell, and so did the rest, one after the other, and then bowers came along with the keg of powder in his arms, while the command were all mixed together, arms and legs on the muddy slope, and so he fell, of course, with the keg and this started the whole detachment down the hill in a body and they landed in a brook at the bottom in a pile and each that was undermost was pulling the hair, scratching and biting those that were on top of him and those that were being scratched and bitten scratching and biting the rest in their turn, and all saying they would die before they would ever go to war again if they ever got out of this brook this time and the invader might rot for all they cared, and the country along with him, and all such talk as that which was dismal to hear and take part in, in such smothered, low voices, and such a grisly dark place and so wet, and the enemy, maybe, coming along at any moment.the keg of powder was lost, and the guns too; so the growling and complaining continued straight along while the brigade pawed around the pasty hill side and slopped around in the brook hunting for these things; consequently we lost considerable time at this, and then we heard a sound and held our breath and listened, and it seemed to be the enemy coming, though it could have been a cow, for it had a cough like a cow, but we did not wait but left a couple of guns behind and struck out for mason's again as briskly as we could scramble along in the dark. but we got lost presently in among the rugged little ravines and wasted a deal of time finding the way again so it was after nine when we reached mason's stile at last; and then before we could open our mouths to give the countersign several dogs came bounding over the fence with a great riot and noise, and each of them took a soldier by the slack of his trousers and began to back away with him. we could not shoot the dogs without endangering the persons they were attached to so we had to look on helpless at what was perhaps the most mortifying spectacle of the civil war. there was light enough and to spare, for the mason's had now run out on the porch with candles in tier hands. the old man and his son came and undid the dogs without difficulty, all but bowers's; but they couldn't undo his dog, they didn't know his combination, he was of the bull kind and seemed to be set with a yale time-lock, but they got him loose at last with some scalding water, of which boweres got his share and returned thanks. peterson dunlap afterwards made up a fine name for this engagement and also for the night march which preceded it but both have long ago faded out of my memory.we now went into the house and they began to ask us a world of questions, whereby it presently came out that we did not know anything concerning who or what we were running from; so the old gentleman made himself very frank and said we were a curious breed of soldiers and guessed we could be depended on to end up the war in time, because the no governor could afford the expense of the shoe leather we should cost it trying to follow us around."marion rangers! good name, b'gosh," said he. and wanted to why we hadn't had a picket guard at the place where the road entered the prairie, and why we hadn't sent out a scouting party to spy out the enemy and bring us an account of his strength, and so on, before jumping up and stampeding out of a strong position upon a mere vague rumour, and so on and so forth, till he made us all feel shabbier than the dogs had done, not so half enthusiastically welcome. so we went to bed shamed and low spirited, except stevens. soon stevens began to devise a garment for bowers which could be made to automatically display his battle scars to the grateful or conceal them from the envious, according to his occasions, but bowers was in no humour for this, so there was a fight and when it was over stevens had some battle scars of his own to think about.then we got a little sleep. but after all we had gone through, our activities were not over for the night, for about two o'clock in the morning we heard a shout of warning from down the lane, accompanied by a chorus from all the dogs, and in a moment everybody was up and flying around to find out what the alarm was about. the alarmist was a horseman who gave notice that a detachment of union soldiers was on its way from hannibal with orders to capture and hang any bands like our which it could find. farmer mason was in a flurry this time himself. he hurried us out of the house with all haste, and sent one of his negroes with us to show us where to hide ourselves and our telltale guns among the ravines half a mile away,. it was raining heavily.we struck down the lane, then across some rocky pasture land which offered good advantages fro stumbling; consequently we were down in the mud most of the time, and every time a man went down he black guarded the war and everybody connected with it, and gave himself the master dose of all for being so foolish as to go into it. at last we reached the wooded mouth of a ravine, and there we huddled ourselves under the streaming trees and sent the negro back home. it was a dismal and heart breaking time. we were like to e drowned with the rain, deafened with the howling wind and the booming thunder, and blinded by the lightning. it was indeed a wild night. the drenching we were getting was misery enough, but a deeper misery still was the reflection that the halter might end us before we were a day older. a death of this shameful sort had not occurred to us as being among the possibilities of war. it took the romance all out of the campaign and turned our dreams of glory into a repulsive nightmare. as for doubting that so barbarous an order had been given, not one of us did that.the long night wore itself out at last, and then the negro came to us with the news that the alarm had manifestly been a false one and that breakfast would soon be ready. straightaway we were light-hearted again and the world was bright and full of life, as full of hope and promise as ever; for we were young then. how long ago that was! twenty four years.the mongrel child of philology named the night's refuge camp devastation and no soul objected. the masons gave us a missouri country breakfast in missourian abundance, and we needed it. hot biscuits, hot wheat bread, prettily crossed in a lattice pattern on top, hot corn pone, fried chicken, bacon, coffee, eggs, milk, buttermilk etc. and the world may be confidently challenged to furnish the equal of such a breakfast, as it is cooked in the south.we stayed several days at mason's and after all these years the memory of the stillness and dullness and lifelessness of that slumberous farmhouse still oppresses my spirit as with a sense of the presence of death and mourning. there was nothing to do. nothing to think about. there was no interest in life. the male part of the household were away in the fields all day, the women were busy and out of our sight, there was no sound but the plaintive wailing of a spinning wheel forever moaning out from some distant room, the most lonesome sound in nature, a sound steeped and sodden with homesickness and the emptiness of life. the family went to bed about dark every night and as we were not invited to intrude any new customs we naturally followed theirs. those nights were a hundred years long to youths accustomed to being up till twelve. we lay awake and miserable till that hour ovariotomy and grew old and decrepit waiting through the still eternities for the clock strikes. this was no place for town boys. so at last it was with something very like joy that we received word that the enemy were on out track again. with a new birth of the old warrior spirit, we sprang to our places in line of battle and fell back on camp ralls.captain lyman had taken a hint from mason's talk, and he now gave orders that our camp should be guarded from surprise by the posting of pickets. i was ordered to place a picket at the forks of the road in hyde's prairie. night shut down black and threatening. i told sergeant bowers to out to that place and stay till midnight, and, just as i was expecting, he said he wouldn't do it. i tried to get others to go but all refused. some excused themselves on account of the weather, but the rest were frank enough to say they wouldn't go in any kind of weather. this kind of thing sounds odd now, and impossible, but there was no surprise in it at the time. on the contrary, it seemed a perfectly natural thing to do. there were scores of little camps scattered over missouri where the same thing was happening. these camps were composed of young men who had been born and reared to a sturdy independence and who did not know what it meant to be ordered around by tom, dick, and harry, who they had known familiarly all their lives in the village or the farm. it is quite within the probabilities that this same thing was happening all over the south. james redpath recognized the justice of this assumption and furnished the following instance in support of it. during a short stay in east tennessee he was in a citizen colonel' s tent one day talking, when a big private appeared at the door and, without salute or other circumlocution, said to the colonel;"say, jim, i'm a goin' home for a few days.""what for?""well, i hain't b'en there for a right smart while and i'd like to see how things is comin' on.""how long are you gonna be gone?""bout two weeks.""well, don't be gone longer than that and get back sooner if you can."that was all, and the citizen officer resumed his conversation where the private had broken it off. this was in the first months of the war of course. the camps in our part of missouri were under brigadier-general thomas h. harris. he was a townsman of ours, a first rate fellow and well liked, but we had all familiarly known him as the soles and modest-salaried operator in the telegraph office, where he had to send about one despatch a week in ordinary times and two when there was a rush of business. consequently, when he appeared in our midst one day on the wing, and delivered a military command of some sort in a large military fashion, nobody was surprised at the response which he got from the assembled soldiery."oh, now what'll you take to don't, tom harris?"it was quite the natural thing. one might justly imagine that we were hopeless material for the war. and so we seemed in our ignorant state, but there were those among us who afterward learned the grim trade, learned to obey like machines, became valuable soldiers, fought all through the war, and came out at the end with excellent records. one of the very boys who refused to go out on picket duty that night and called me an ass for thinking he would expose himself to danger in such a foolhardy way, had become distinguished for intrepidity before he was a year older.i did secure my picket that might, not by authority but by diplomacy. i got bowers to go by agreeing to exchange ranks with him for the time being and go along and stand the watch with him as his subordinate. we stayed out there a couple of dreary hours in the pitchy darkness and the rain, with nothing to modify the dreariness but bower's monotonous growling at the war and the weather, then we began to nod and presently found it next to impossible to stay in the saddle, so we gave up the tedious job and went back to the camp without interruption or objection from anybody and the enemy could have done the same, for there were no sentries. everybody was asleep, at midnight there was nobody to send out another picket so none was sent. we never tried to establish a watch at night again, as far as i remember, but we generally kept a picket out in the daytime.in that camp the whole command slept on the corn in the big corn crib and there was usually a general row before morning, for the place was full of rats and they would scramble over the boys'  bodies and faces, annoying and irritating everybody, and now and  then they would bite someone's toe, and the person who owned the  toe would start up and magnify his english and begin to throw corn  in the dark. the ears were half as heavy as bricks and when they struck they hurt. the persons struck would respond and inside of  five minutes everyman would be locked in a death grip with his neighbour. there was a grievous deal of blood shed in the corn crib but this was all that was spilt while i was in the war. no, that is not quite true. but for one circumstance it would have been all.our scares were frequent. every few days rumours would come that the enemy were approaching. in these cases we always fell back on some other camp of ours; we never stayed where we were. but the rumours always turned out to be false, so at last we even began to grow indifferent to them. one night a negro was sent to our corn crib with the same old warning, the enemy was hovering in our neighbourhood. we all said let him hover. we resolved to stay still and be comfortable. it was a fine warlike resolution, and no doubt we all felt the stir of it in our veins--for a moment. we had been having a very jolly time, that was full of horseplay  and schoolboy hilarity, but that cooled down and presently the  fast waning fire of forced jokes and forced laughs died out altogether and the company became silent. silent and nervous. and soon uneasy--worried and apprehensive. we had said we would stay and we were committed. we could have been persuaded to go but there was nobody brave enough to suggest it. an almost noiseless movement began in the dark by a general but unvoiced impulse. when the movement was completed, each man knew that he was not the only person who had crept to the front wall and had his eye at a crack between the logs. no, we were all there, all there with our hearts in our throats and staring out towards the  sugar-troughs where the forest footpath came through. it was  late and there was a deep woodsy stillness everywhere. there was a veiled moonlight which was only just strong enough to enable us to mark the general shapes of objects. presently a  muffled sound caught our ears and we recognized the hoof-beats of a horse or horses. and right away, a figure appeared in the forest path; it could have been made of smoke, its mass had such little sharpness of outline. it was a man on horseback, and it seemed to me that there were others behind him. i got a hold of a gun in the dark, and pushed it through a crack between the logs, hardly knowing what i was doing, i was so dazed with fright. somebody said "fire!" i pulled the trigger, i seemed to see a  hundred flashes and a hundred reports, then i saw the man fall down out of the saddle. my first feeling was of surprised gratification; my first impulse was an apprentice-sportsman's  impulse to run and pick up his game. somebody said, hardly  audibly, "good, we've got him. wait for the rest!" but the rest did not come. there was not a sound, not the whisper of a leaf; just the perfect stillness, an uncanny kind of stillness which was all the more uncanny on account of the damp, earthy,  late night smells now rising and pervading it. then, wondering, we crept out stealthily and approached the man. when we got to him, the moon revealed him distinctly. he was laying on his back with his arms abroad, his mouth was open and his chest was heaving with long gasps, and his white shirt front was splashed with  blood. the thought shot through me that i was a murderer, that i had killed a man, a man who had never done me any harm. that  was the coldest sensation that ever went through my marrow. i was down by him in a moment, helplessly stroking his forehead,  and i would have given anything then, my own life freely, to  make him again what he had been five minutes before. and all the boys seemed to be feeling the same way; they hung over him, full of pitying interest, and tried all they could to help him, and said all sorts of regretful things. they had forgotten all about the enemy, they thought only of this one forlorn unit of the foe. once my imagination persuaded me that the dying man  gave me a reproachful look out of the shadow of his eyes, and it seemed to me that i could rather that he had stabbed me than he had done that. he muttered and mumbled like a dreamer in his sleep about his wife and his child, and, i thought with a new despair, "this thing that i have done does not end with him; it falls upon them too, and they never did me any harm, any more than he."in a little while the man was dead. he was killed in war, killed in fair and legitimate war, killed in battles as you may say, and yet he was as sincerely mourned by the opposing force as if he had been their brother. the boys stood there a half-hour sorrowing over him and recalling the details of the tragedy, and wondering who he might be and if he was a spy, and saying if they had it to do over again, they would not hurt him unless he attacked them first. it soon turned out that mine was not the only shot fired; there were five others, a division of the guilt which was a great relief to me since it in some degree lightened and diminished the burden i was carrying. there were six shots fired at once but i was not in my right mind at the time, and my heated imagination had magnified my one shot into a volley.the mans was not in uniform and was not armed. he was a stranger in  the country, that was all we ever found out about him. the thought of hi got to preying on me every night, i could not get rid of it. i could not drive it away, the taking of that unoffending life seemed such a wanton thing. and it seemed an epitome of war, that all war must just be the killing of strangers against whom you feel no personal animosity, strangers who in other circumstances you would help if you found them in trouble, and who would help you if you needed it. my campaign was spoiled. it seemed to me that i was not rightly equipped for this awful business, that war was intended for men and i for a child's nurse. i resolved to retire from this avocation of sham soldier-ship while i could retain some remanent of my self-respect. these morbid thoughts clung to me against reason, for at the bottom i did not believe i had touched this man. the law of probabilities decreed me guiltless of his blood for in all my small experiences with guns, i had not hit anything i had tried to  hit, and i knew i had done my best to hit him. yet there was no solace in the thought. against a diseased imagination, demonstration goes for nothing.the rest of my war experience was of a piece with what i have already told of it. we kept monotonously falling back upon one camp or another and eating up the farmers and their families. they ought to have shot us; on the contrary they were as hospitably kind and courteous to us as if we had deserved it. in one of these camps we found ab grimes, an upper mississippi pilot who afterwards became famous as a daredevil rebel spy, whose career bristled with desperate adventures. the loom and style of his comrades suggested that they had  not come into the war to play and their deeds made good the conjecture later. they were fine horsemen and good revolver shots, but their  favourite arm was the lasso. each had one at his pommel, and could snatch a man out of his saddle with it ovariotomy, on a full gallop, at any reasonable distance.in another camp, the chief was a fierce and profane old black-smith of sixty and he had furnished his twenty recruits with gigantic,  home-made bowie-knives, to be swung with two hands like the machetes of the isthmus. it was a grisly spectacle to see that earnest band  practising their murderous cuts and slashes under the eye of that remorseless old fanatic.the last camp which we fell back on was in a hollow near the village of florida where i was born, in monroe county. here we were warned one day that a union colonel was sweeping down on us with a whole regiment at his heels. this looked decidedly serious. our boys went apart and consulted; then we went back and told the other companies present that the war was a disappointment to us and we were going to disband. they were getting ready themselves to fall back on some place or another, and we were only waiting for general tom harris, who was expected to arrive at any moment, so they tried to persuade us to wait a little while but the majority of us said no, we were accustomed  to falling back and didn't need any of harris's help, we could get along perfectly without him and save time too. so, about half of our fifteen men, including myself, mounted, and left on the instant; the others yielded to persuasion, and stayed--stayed through the war.an hour later we met general harris on the road, with two or three people in his company, his staff probably, but we could not tell; none of them were in uniform; uniforms had not come into vogue among us yet.  harris ordered us back, but we told him there was a union colonel coming with a whole regiment in his wake and it looked as if there was going to be a disturbance, so we had concluded to go home. he raged a little bit, but it was of no use, our minds were made up. we had done our share, killed one man, exterminated one army, such as it was; let him go and kill the rest and that would end the war. i did not see that brisk young general again until last year; he was wearing white hair and whiskers.in time i came to learn that the union colonel whose coming frightened me out of the war and crippled the southern cause to that extent; general grant. i came within a few hours of seeing him when he was as  unknown as i was myself; at a time when anybody could have said,  "grant--ulysses s grant? i do not remember hearing the name before." it seems difficult to realize there was once a time when such a  remark could be rationally made, but there was, i was within a few miles of the place and the occasion too, though proceeding in the other direction.the thoughtful will not throw this war paper of mine lightly aside as being valueless. it has this value; it is not an unfair picture of what went on in may a militia camp in the first months of the rebellion, when the green recruits were without discipline, without the steadying and heartening influence of trained leaders, when all their circumstances were new and strange and charged with exaggerated  terrors, and before the invaluable experience of actual collision in the field had turned them from rabbits into soldiers. if this side of the picture of that early day has not before been put into history, then history has been, to that degree incomplete, for it had and has its rightful place there. there was more bull run material scattered through the early camps of this country than exhibited itself at bull run. and yet, it learned it's trade presently and helped to fight the great battles later. i could have become a soldier myself if i had waited. i had got part of it learned, i knew more about retreating than the man that invented retreating.consider that a conversation by telephone--when you are simply sitting by and not taking any part in that conversation--is one of the solemnest curiosities of modern life. yesterday i was writing a deep article on a sublime philosophical subject while such a conversation was going on in the room. i notice that one can always write best when somebody is talking through a telephone close by. well, the thing began in this way. a member of our household came in and asked me to have our house put into communication with mr. bagley's downtown. i have observed, in many cities, that the sex always shrink from calling up the central office themselves. i don't know why, but they do. so i touched the bell, and this talk ensued:central office. gruffy. hello!i. is it the central office?c. o. of course it is. what do you want?i. will you switch me on to the bagleys, please?c. o. all right. just keep your ear to the telephone.then i heard k-look, k-look, k'look--klook-klook-klook-look-look! then a horrible "gritting" of teeth, and finally a piping female voice: y-e-s? rising inflection. did you wish to speak to me?without answering, i handed the telephone to the applicant, and sat down. then followed that queerest of all the queer things in this world-- a conversation with only one end of it. you hear questions asked; you don't hear the answer. you hear invitations given; you hear no thanks in return. you have listening pauses of dead silence, followed by apparently irrelevant and unjustifiable exclamations of glad surprise or sorrow or dismay. you can't make head or tail of the talk, because you never hear anything that the person at the other end of the wire says. well, i heard the following remarkable series of observations, all from the one tongue, and all shouted-- for you can't ever persuade the sex to speak gently into a telephone:yes? why, how did that happen?pause.what did you say?pause.oh no, i don't think it was.pause.no! oh no, i didn't mean that. i meant, put it in while it is still boiling--or just before it comes to a boil.pause.what?pause.i turned it over with a backstitch on the selvage edge.pause.yes, i like that way, too; but i think it's better to baste it on with valenciennes or bombazine, or something of that sort. it gives it such an air--and attracts so much noise.pause.it's forty-ninth deuteronomy, sixty-forth to ninety-seventh inclusive. i think we ought all to read it often.pause.perhaps so; i generally use a hair pin.pause.what did you say? aside. children, do be quiet!pause.oh! b flat! dear me, i thought you said it was the cat!pause.since when?pause.why, i never heard of it.pause.you astound me! it seems utterly impossible!pause.who did?pause.good-ness gracious!pause.well, what is this world coming to? was it right in church?pause.and was her mother there?pause.why, mrs. bagley, i should have died of humiliation! what did they do?long pause.i can't be perfectly sure, because i haven't the notes by me; but i think it goes something like this: te-rolly-loll-loll, loll lolly-loll-loll, o tolly-loll-loll-lee-ly-li-i-do! and then repeat, you know.pause.yes, i think it is very sweet--and very solemn and impressive, if you get the andantino and the pianissimo right.pause.oh, gum-drops, gum-drops! but i never allow them to eat striped candy. and of course they can't, till they get their teeth, anyway.pause.what?pause.oh, not in the least--go right on. he's here writing--it doesn't bother him.pause.very well, i'll come if i can. aside. dear me, how it does tire a person's arm to hold this thing up so long! i wish she'd--pause.oh no, not at all; i like to talk--but i'm afraid i'm keeping you from your affairs.pause.visitors?pause.no, we never use butter on them.pause.yes, that is a very good way; but all the cook-books say they are very unhealthy when they are out of season. and he doesn't like them, anyway--especially canned.pause.oh, i think that is too high for them; we have never paid over fifty cents a bunch.pause.must you go? well, good-by.pause.yes, i think so. good-by.pause.four o'clock, then--i'll be ready. good-by.pause.thank you ever so much. good-by.pause.oh, not at all!--just as fresh--which? oh, i'm glad to hear you say that. good-by.hangs up the telephone and says, "oh, it does tire a person's arm so!"chapter i"you confess it--you actually confess it--you told a lie!"chapter iithe family consisted of four persons: margaret lester, widow, aged thirty six; helen lester, her daughter, aged sixteen; mrs. lester's maiden aunts, hannah and hester gray, twins, aged sixty-seven. waking and sleeping, the three women spent their days and night in adoring the young girl; in watching the movements of her sweet spirit in the mirror of her face; in refreshing their souls with the vision of her bloom and beauty; in listening to the music of her voice; in gratefully recognizing how rich and fair for them was the world with this presence in it; in shuddering to think how desolate it would be with this light gone out of it.by nature--and inside--the aged aunts were utterly dear and lovable and good, but in the matter of morals and conduct their training had been so uncompromisingly strict that it had made them exteriorly austere, not to say stern. their influence was effective in the house; so effective that the mother and the daughter conformed to its moral and religious requirements cheerfully, contentedly, happily, unquestionably.  to do this was become second nature to them.  and so in this peaceful heaven there were no clashings, no irritations, no fault-finding, no heart-burnings.in it a lie had no place.  in it a lie was unthinkable.  in it speech was restricted to absolute truth, iron-bound truth, implacable and uncompromising truth, let the resulting consequences be what they might.  at last, one day, under stress of circumstances, the darling of the house sullied her lips with a lie--and confessed it, with tears and self-upbraidings. there are not any words that can paint the consternation of the aunts.  it was as if the sky had crumpled up and collapsed and the earth had tumbled to ruin with a crash.  they sat side by side, white and stern, gazing speechless upon the culprit, who was on her knees before them with her face buried first in one lap and then the other, moaning and sobbing, and appealing for sympathy and forgiveness and getting no response, humbly kissing the hand of the one, then of the other, only to see it withdrawn as suffering defilement by those soiled lips.twice, at intervals, aunt hester said, in frozen amazement: "you told a lie?"twice, at intervals, aunt hannah followed with the muttered and amazed ejaculation:"you confess it--you actually confess it--you told a lie!"it was all they could say.  the situation was new, unheard of, incredible; they could not understand it, they did not know how to take hold of it, it approximately paralyzed speech.at length it was decided that the erring child must be taken to her mother, who was ill, and who ought to know what had happened.  helen begged, besought, implored that she might be spared this further disgrace, and that her mother might be spared the grief and pain of it; but this could not be:  duty required this sacrifice, duty takes precedence of all things, nothing can absolve one from a duty, with a duty no compromise is possible.helen still begged, and said the sin was her own, her mother had had no hand in it--why must she be made to suffer for it?but the aunts were obdurate in their righteousness, and said the law that visited the sins of the parent upon the child was by all right and reason reversible; and therefore it was but just that the innocent mother of a sinning child should suffer her rightful share of the grief and pain and shame which were the allotted wages of the sin.the three moved toward the sick-room.at this time the doctor was approaching the house.  he was still a good distance away, however.  he was a good doctor and a good man, and he had a good heart, but one had to know him a year to get over hating him, two years to learn to endure him, three to learn to like him, and four and five to learn to live him.  it was a slow and trying education, but it paid.  he was of great stature; he had a leonine head, a leonine face, a rough voice, and an eye which was sometimes a pirate's and sometimes a woman's, according to the mood.  he knew nothing about etiquette, and cared nothing about it; in speech, manner, carriage, and conduct he was the reverse of conventional.  he was frank, to the limit; he had opinions on all subjects; they were always on tap and ready for delivery, and he cared not a farthing whether his listener liked them or didn't. whom he loved he loved, and manifested it; whom he didn't live he hated, and published it from the housetops.  in his young days he had!  been a sailor, and the salt-airs of all the seas blew from him yet.  he was a sturdy and loyal christian, and believed he was the best one in the land, and the only one whose christianity was perfectly sound, healthy, full-charged with common sense, and had no decayed places in it.  people who had an ax to grind, or people who for any reason wanted wanted to get on the soft side of him, called him the christian--a phrase whose delicate flattery was music to his ears, and whose capital t was such an enchanting and vivid object to him that he could see it when it fell out of a person's mouth even in the dark.  many who were fond of him stood on their consciences with both feet and brazenly called him by that large title habitually, because it was a pleasure to them to do anything that would please him; and with eager and cordial malice his extensive and diligently cultivated crop of enemies gilded it, beflowered it, expanded it to "the only christian."  of these two titles, the!  latter had the wider currency; the enemy, being greatly in the majority, attended to that.  whatever the doctor believed, he believed with all his heart, and would fight for it whenever he got the chance; and if the intervals between chances grew to be irksomely wide, he would invent ways of shortening them himself.  he was severely conscientious, according to his rather independent lights, and whatever he took to be a duty he performed, no matter whether the judgment of the professional moralists agreed with his own or not.  at sea, in his young days, he had used profanity freely, but as soon as he was converted he made a rule, which he rigidly stuck to ever afterward, never to use it except on the rarest occasions, and then only when duty commanded.  he had been a hard drinker at sea, but after his conversion he became a firm and outspoken teetotaler, in order to be an example to the young, and from that time forth he seldom drank; never, indeed, except when it seemed to hi! m to be a duty--a condition which sometimes occurred a couple of times a year, but never as many as five times.necessarily, such a man is impressionable, impulsive, emotional.  this one was, and had no gift at hiding his feelings; or if he had it he took no trouble to exercise it.  he carried his soul's prevailing weather in his face, and when he entered a room the parasols or the umbrellas went up--figuratively speaking--according to the indications.  when the soft light was in his eye it meant approval, and delivered a benediction; when he came with a frown he lowered the temperature ten degrees.  he was a well-beloved man in the house of his friends, but sometimes a dreaded one.he had a deep affection for the lester household and its several members returned this feeling with interest.  they mourned over his kind of christianity, and he frankly scoffed at theirs; but both parties went on loving each other just the same.he was approaching the house--out of the distance; the aunts and the culprit were moving toward the sick-chamber.chapter iiithe three last named stood by the bed; the aunts austere, the transgressor softly sobbing.  the mother turned her head on the pillow; her tired eyes flamed up instantly with sympathy and passionate mother-love when they fell upon her child, and she opened the refuge and shelter of her arms."wait!" said aunt hannah, and put out her hand and stayed the girl from leaping into them."helen," said the other aunt, impressively, "tell your mother all.  purge your soul; leave nothing unconfessed."standing stricken and forlorn before her judges, the young girl mourned her sorrowful tale through the end, then in a passion of appeal cried out:"oh, mother, can't you forgive me? won't you forgive me?--i am so desolate!""forgive you, my darling?  oh, come to my arms!--there, lay your head upon my breast, and be at peace.  if you had told a thousand lies--"there was a sound--a warning--the clearing of a throat.  the aunts glanced up, and withered in their clothes--there stood the doctor, his face a thunder-cloud. mother and child knew nothing of his presence; they lay locked together, heart to heart, steeped in immeasurable content, dead to all things else.  the physician stood many moments glaring and glooming upon the scene before him; studying it, analyzing it, searching out its genesis; then he put up his hand and beckoned to the aunts.  they came trembling to him, and stood humbly before him and waited.  he bent down and whispered:"didn't i tell you this patient must be protected from all excitement? what the hell have you been doing?  clear out of the place?"they obeyed.  half an hour later he appeared in the parlor, serene, cheery, clothed in sunshine, conducting helen, with his arm about her waist, petting her, and saying gentle and playful things to her; and she also was her sunny and happy self again."now, then;" he said, "good-by, dear.  go to your room, and keep away from your mother, and behave yourself.  but wait--put out your tongue.  there, that will do--you're as sound as a nut!"  he patted her cheek and added, "run along now; i want to talk to these aunts."she went from the presence.  his face clouded over again at once; and as he sat down he said:"you too have been doing a lot of damage--and maybe some good.  some good, yes--such as it is.  that woman's disease is typhoid!  you've brought it to a show-up, i think, with your insanities, and that's a service--such as it is.  i hadn't been able to determine what it was before."with one impulse the old ladies sprang to their feet, quaking with terror."sit down!  what are you proposing to do?""do?  we must fly to her.  we--""you'll do nothing of the kind; you've done enough harm for one day.  do you want to squander all your capital of crimes and follies on a single deal?  sit down, i tell you.  i have arranged for her to sleep; she needs it; if you disturb her without my orders, i'll brain you--if you've got the materials for it.they sat down, distressed and indignant, but obedient, under compulsion.  he proceeded:"now, then, i want this case explained.  they wanted to explain it to me--as if there hadn't been emotion or excitement enough already.  you knew my orders; how did you dare to go in there and get up that riot?"hester looked appealing at hannah; hannah returned a beseeching look at hester--neither wanted to dance to this unsympathetic orchestra.  the doctor came to their help.  he said:"begin, hester."fingering at the fringes of her shawl, and with lowered eyes, hester said, timidly:"we should not have disobeyed for any ordinary cause, but this was vital.  this was a duty.  with a duty one has no choice; one must put all lighter considerations aside and perform it.  we were obliged to arraign her before her mother.  she had told a lie."the doctor glowered upon the woman a moment, and seemed to be trying to work up in his mind an understand of a wholly incomprehensible proposition; then he stormed out:"she told a lie!  did she?  god bless my soul!  i tell a million a day!  and so does every doctor.  and so does everybody--including you-- for that matter.  and that was the important thing that authorized you to venture to disobey my orders and imperil that woman's life!  look here, hester gray, this is pure lunacy; that girl couldn't tell a lie that was intended to injure a person.  the thing is impossible--absolutely impossible.  you know it yourselves--both of you; you know it perfectly well."hannah came to her sister's rescue:"hester didn't mean that it was that kind of a lie, and it wasn't. but it was a lie.""well, upon my word, i never heard such nonsense!  haven't you got sense enough to discriminate between lies!  don't you know the difference between a lie that helps and a lie that hurts?""all lies are sinful," said hannah, setting her lips together like a vise; "all lies are forbidden."the only christian fidgeted impatiently in his chair.  he wentto attack this proposition, but he did not quite know how or where to begin.  finally he made a venture:"hester, wouldn't you tell a lie to shield a person from an undeserved injury or shame?""no.""not even a friend?""no.""not even your dearest friend?""no. i would not."the doctor struggled in silence awhile with this situation; then he asked:"not even to save him from bitter pain and misery and grief?""no. not even to save his life."another pause.  then:"nor his soul?"there was a hush--a silence which endured a measurable interval--then hester answered, in a low voice, but with decision:"nor his soul?"no one spoke for a while; then the doctor said:"is it with you the same, hannah?""yes," she answered."i ask you both--why?""because to tell such a lie, or any lie, is a sin, and could cost us the loss of our own souls--would, indeed, if we died without time to repent.""strange . . . strange . . . it is past belief."  then he asked, roughly:  "is such a soul as that worth saving?"  he rose up, mumbling and grumbling, and started for the door, stumping vigorously along.  at the threshold he turned and rasped out an admonition:  "reform!  drop this mean and sordid and selfish devotion to the saving of your shabby little souls, and hunt up something to do that's got some dignity to it!  risk your souls! risk them in good causes; then if you lose them, why should you care?  reform!"the good old gentlewomen sat paralyzed, pulverized, outraged, insulted, and brooded in bitterness and indignation over these blasphemies.  they were hurt to the heart, poor old ladies, and said they could never forgive these injuries."reform!"they kept repeating that word resentfully.  "reform--and learn to tell lies!"time slipped along, and in due course a change came over their spirits.  they had completed the human being's first duty--which is to think about himself until he has exhausted the subject, then he is in a condition to take up minor interests and think of other people.  this changes the complexion of his spirits--generally wholesomely.  the minds of the two old ladies reverted to their beloved niece and the fearful disease which had smitten her; instantly they forgot the hurts their self-love had received, and a passionate desire rose in their hearts to go to the help of the sufferer and comfort her with their love, and minister to her, and labor for her the best they could with their weak hands, and joyfully and affectionately wear out their poor old bodies in her dear service if only they might have the privilege."and we shall have it!" said hester, with the tears running down her face.  "there are no nurses comparable to us, for there are no others that will stand their watch by that bed till they drop and die, and god knows we would do that.""amen," said hannah, smiling approval and endorsement through the mist of moisture that blurred her glasses.  "the doctor knows us, and knows we will not disobey again; and he will call no others.  he will not dare!""dare?" said hester, with temper, and dashing the water from her eyes; "he will dare anything--that christian devil!  but it will do no good for him to try it this time--but, laws!  hannah! after all's said and done, he is gifted and wise and good, and he would not think of such a thing.  . . . it is surely time for one of us to go to that room.  what is keeping him?  why doesn't he come and say so?"they caught the sound of his approaching step.  he entered, sat down, and began to talk.margaret is a sick woman," he said.  "she is still sleeping, but she will wake presently; then one of you must go to her.  she will be worse before she is better.  pretty soon a night-and-day watch must be set.  how much of it can you two undertake?""all of it!" burst from both ladies at once.the doctor's eyes flashed, and he said, with energy:"you do ring true, you brave old relics!  and you shall do all of the nursing you can, for there's none to match you in that divine office in this town; but you can't do all of it, and it would be a crime to let you."  it was grand praise, golden praise, coming from such a source, and it took nearly all the resentment out of the aged twin's hearts.  "your tilly and my old nancy shall do the rest--good nurses both, white souls with black skins, watchful, loving, tender--just perfect nurses!--and competent liars from the cradle.  . . . look you! keep a little watch on helen; she is sick, and is going to be sicker."the ladies looked a little surprised, and not credulous; and hester said:"how is that?  it isn't an hour since you said she was as sound as a nut."the doctor answered, tranquilly:"it was a lie."the ladies turned upon him indignantly, and hannah said:"how can you make an odious confession like that, in so indifferent a tone, when you know how we feel about all forms of--""hush!  you are as ignorant as cats, both of you, and you don't know what you are talking about.  you are like all the rest of the moral moles; you lie from morning till night, but because you don't do it with your mouths, but only with your lying eyes, your lying inflections, your deceptively misplaced emphasis, and your misleading gestures, you turn up your complacent noses and parade before god and the world as saintly and unsmirched truth-speakers, in whose cold-storage souls a lie would freeze to death if it got there!  why will you humbug yourselves with that foolish notion that no lie is a lie except a spoken one?  what is the difference between lying with your eyes and lying with your mouth?  there is none; and if you would reflect a moment you would see that it is so.  there isn't a human being that doesn't tell a gross of lies every day of his life; and you--why, between you, you tell thirty thousand; yet you flare up here in a lurid hypocritical horror because i tel! l that child a benevolent and sinless lie to protect her from her imagination, which would get to work and warm up her blood to a fever in an hour, if i were disloyal enough to my duty to let it.  which i should probably do if i were interested in saving my soul by such disreputable means."come, let us reason together.  let us examine details.  when you two were in the sick-room raising that riot, what would you have done if you had known i was coming?""well, what?""you would have slipped out and carried helen with you--wouldn't you?"the ladies were silent."what would be your object and intention?""well, what?""to keep me from finding out your guilt; to beguile me to infer that margaret's excitement proceeded from some cause not known to you.  in a word, to tell me a lie--a silent lie.  moreover, a possibly harmful one."the twins colored, but did not speak."you not only tell myriads of silent lies, but you tell lies with your mouths--you two.""that is not so!""it is so.  but only harmless ones.  you never dream of uttering a harmful one.  do you know that that is a concession--and a confession?""how do you mean?""it is an unconscious concession that harmless lies are not criminal; it is a confession that you constantly make that discrimination.  for instance, you declined old mrs. foster's invitation last week to meet those odious higbies at supper--in a polite note in which you expressed regret and said you were very sorry you could not go.  it was a lie.  it was as unmitigated a lie as was ever uttered. deny it, hester--with another lie."hester replied with a toss of her head."that will not do.  answer.  was it a lie, or wasn't it?"the color stole into the cheeks of both women, and with a struggle and an effort they got out their confession:"it was a lie.""good--the reform is beginning; there is hope for you yet; you will not tell a lie to save your dearest friend's soul, but you will spew out one without a scruple to save yourself the discomfort of telling an unpleasant truth."he rose.  hester, speaking for both, said; coldly:"we have lied; we perceive it; it will occur no more.  to lie is a sin.  we shall never tell another one of any kind whatsoever, even lies of courtesy or benevolence, to save any one a pang or a sorrow decreed for him by god.""ah, how soon you will fall!  in fact, you have fallen already; for what you have just uttered is a lie.  good-by. reform!  one of you go to the sick-room now."chapter ivtwelve days later.mother and child were lingering in the grip of the hideous disease.  of hope for either there was little.  the aged sisters looked white and worn, but they would not give up their posts.  their hearts were breaking, poor old things, but their grit was steadfast and indestructible.  all the twelve days the mother had pined for the child, and the child for the mother, but both knew that the prayer of these longings could not be granted.  when the mother was told--on the first day--that her disease was typhoid, she was frightened, and asked if there was danger that helen could have contracted it the day before, when she was in the sick-chamber on that confession visit.  hester told her the doctor had poo-pooed the idea.  it troubled hester to say it, although it was true, for she had not believed the doctor; but when she saw the mother's joy in the news, the pain in her conscience lost something of its force--a result which made her ashamed of the constructive deception which she!  had practiced, though not ashamed enough to make her distinctly and definitely wish she had refrained from it.  from that moment the sick woman understood that her daughter must remain away, and she said she would reconcile herself to the separation the best she could, for she would rather suffer death than have her child's health imperiled.  that afternoon helen had to take to her bed, ill.  she grew worse during the night.  in the morning her mother asked after her:"is she well?"hester turned cold; she opened her lips, but the words refused to come.  the mother lay languidly looking, musing, waiting; suddenly she turned white and gasped out:"oh, my god! what is it? is she sick?"then the poor aunt's tortured heart rose in rebellion, and words came:"no--be comforted; she is well."the sick woman put all her happy heart in her gratitude:"thank god for those dear words!  kiss me.  how i worship you for saying them!"hester told this incident to hannah, who received it with a rebuking look, and said, coldly:"sister, it was a lie."hester's lips trembled piteously; she choked down a sob, and said:"oh, hannah, it was a sin, but i could not help it.  i could not endure the fright and the misery that were in her face.""no matter.  it was a lie.  god will hold you to account for it.""oh, i know it, i know it," cried hester, wringing her hands, "but even if it were now, i could not help it.  i know i should do it again.""then take my place with helen in the morning.  i will make the report myself."hester clung to her sister, begging and imploring."don't, hannah, oh, don't--you will kill her.""i will at least speak the truth."in the morning she had a cruel report to bear to the mother, and she braced herself for the trial.  when she returned from her mission, hester was waiting, pale and trembling, in the hall. she whispered:"oh, how did she take it--that poor, desolate mother?"hannah's eyes were swimming in tears.  she said:"god forgive me, i told her the child was well!"hester gathered her to her heart, with a grateful "god bless you, hannah!" and poured out her thankfulness in an inundation of worshiping praises.after that, the two knew the limit of their strength, and accepted their fate.  they surrendered humbly, and abandoned themselves to the hard requirements of the situation.  daily they told the morning lie, and confessed their sin in prayer; not asking forgiveness, as not being worthy of it, but only wishing to make record that they realized their wickedness and were not desiring to hide it or excuse it.daily, as the fair young idol of the house sank lower and lower, the sorrowful old aunts painted her glowing bloom and her fresh young beauty to the wan mother, and winced under the stabs her ecstasies of joy and gratitude gave them.in the first days, while the child had strength to hold a pencil, she wrote fond little love-notes to her mother, in which she concealed her illness; and these the mother read and reread through happy eyes wet with thankful tears, and kissed them over and over again, and treasured them as precious things under her pillow.then came a day when the strength was gone from the hand, and the mind wandered, and the tongue babbled pathetic incoherences.  this was a sore dilemma for the poor aunts.  there were no love-notes for the mother.  they did not know what to do.  hester began a carefully studied and plausible explanation, but lost the track of it and grew confused; suspicion began to show in the mother's face, then alarm.  hester saw it, recognized the imminence of the danger, and descended to the emergency, pulling herself resolutely together and plucking victor from the open jaws of defeat.  in a placid and convincing voice she said:"i thought it might distress you to know it, but helen spent the night at the sloanes'. there was a little party there, and, although she did not want to go, and you so sick, we persuaded her, she being young and needing the innocent pastimes of youth, and we believing you would approve.  be sure she will write the moment she comes.""how good you are, and how dear and thoughtful for us both!  approve?  why, i thank you with all my heart.  my poor little exile!  tell her i want her to have every pleasure she can--i would not rob her of one.  only let her keep her health, that is all i ask.  don't let that suffer; i could not bear it.  how thankful i am that she escaped this infection--and what a narrow risk she ran, aunt hester!  think of that lovely face all dulled and burned with fever.  i can't bear the thought of it.  keep her health.  keep her bloom!  i can see her now, the dainty creature--with the big, blue, earnest eyes; and sweet, oh, so sweet and gentle and winning!  is she as beautiful as ever, dear aunt hester?""oh, more beautiful and bright and charming than ever she was before, if such a thing can be"--and hester turned away and fumbled with the medicine-bottles, to hide her shame and grief.chapter vafter a little, both aunts were laboring upon a difficult and baffling work in helen's chamber.  patiently and earnestly, with their stiff old fingers, they were trying to forge the required note.  they made failure after failure, but they improved little by little all the time.  the pity of it all, the pathetic humor of it, there was none to see; they themselves were unconscious of it.   often their tears fell upon the notes and spoiled them; sometimes a single misformed word made a note risky which could have been ventured but for that; but at last hannah produced one whose script was a good enough imitation of  helen's to pass any but a suspicious eye, and bountifully enriched it with the petting phrases and loving nicknames that had been familiar on the child's lips from her nursery days.  she carried it to the mother, who took it with avidity, and kissed it, and fondled it, reading its precious words over and over again, and dwelling with deep contentment upon its closing paragraph:"mousie darling, if i could only see you, and kiss your eyes, and feel your arms about me!  i am so glad my practicing does not disturb you.  get well soon.  everybody is good to me, but i am so lonesome without you, dear mamma.""the poor child, i know just how she feels.  she cannot be quite happy without me; and i--oh, i live in the light of her eyes!  tell her she must practice all she pleases; and, aunt hannah-- tell her i can't hear the piano this far, nor hear dear voice when she sings:  god knows i wish i could.  no one knows how sweet that voice is to me; and to think--some day it will be silent!  what are you crying for?"only because--because--it was just a memory.  when i came away she was singing, 'loch lomond.'  the pathos of it!  it always moves me so when she sings that.""and me, too.  how heartbreakingly beautiful it is when some youthful sorrow is brooding in her breast and she sings it for the mystic healing it brings.  . . . aunt hannah?""dear margaret?""i am very ill.  sometimes it comes over me that i shall never hear that dear voice again.""oh, don't--don't, margaret!  i can't bear it!"margaret was moved and distressed, and said, gently:"there--there--let me put my arms around you.  don't cry.  there--put your cheek to mine.  be comforted.  i wish to live.  i will live if i can.  ah, what could she do without me! . . . does she often speak of me?--but i know she does.""oh, all the time--all the time!""my sweet child!  she wrote the note the moment she came home?""yes--the first moment.  she would not wait to take off her things.""i knew it.  it is her dear, impulsive, affectionate way.  i knew it without asking, but i wanted to hear you say it.  the petted wife knows she is loved, but she makes her husband tell her so every day, just for the joy of hearing it.  . . . she used the pen this time.  that is better; the pencil-marks could rub out, and i should grieve for that.  did you suggest that she use the pen?""y--no--she--it was her own idea.the mother looked her pleasure, and said:"i was hoping you would say that.  there was never such a dear and thoughtful child! . . . aunt hannah?""dear margaret?""go and tell her i think of her all the time, and worship her.  why--you are crying again.  don't be so worried about me, dear; i think there is nothing to fear, yet."the grieving messenger carried her message, and piously delivered it to unheeding ears.  the girl babbled on unaware; looking up at her with wondering and startled eyes flaming with fever, eyes in which was no light of recognition:"are you--no, you are not my mother.  i want her--oh, i want her!  she was here a minute ago--i did not see her go.  will she come? will she come quickly? will she come now? . . . there are so many houses . . . and they oppress me so . . . and everything whirls and turns and whirls . . . oh, my head, my head!"--and so she wandered on and on, in her pain, flitting from one torturing fancy to another,and tossing her arms about in a weary and ceaseless persecution of unrest.poor old hannah wetted the parched lips and softly stroked the hot brow, murmuring endearing and pitying words, and thanking the father of all that the mother was happy and did not know.chapter vidaily the child sank lower and steadily lower towards the grave, and daily the sorrowing old watchers carried gilded tidings of her radiant health and  loveliness to the happy mother, whose pilgrimage was also now nearing its end.  and daily they forged loving and cheery notes in the child's hand, and stood by with remorseful consciences and bleeding hearts, and wept to see the grateful mother devour them and adore them and treasure them away as things beyond  price, because of their sweet source, and sacred because her child's hand had touched them.at last came that kindly friend who brings healing and peace to all.  the lights were burning low.  in the solemn hush which precedes the dawn vague figures flitted soundless along the dim hall and gathered silent and awed in helen's chamber, and grouped themselves about her bed, for a warning had gone forth, and they knew.  the dying girl lay with closed lids, and unconscious, the drapery upon her breast faintly rising and falling as her wasting life ebbed away.  at intervals a sigh or a muffled sob broke upon the stillness. the same haunting thought was in all minds there:  the pity of this death, the going out into the great darkness, and the mother not here to help and hearten and bless.helen stirred; her hands began to grope wistfully about as if they sought something--she had been blind some hours.  the end was come; all knew it.  with a great sob hester gathered her to her breast, crying, "oh, my child, my  darling!"  a rapturous light broke in the dying girl's face, for it was mercifully vouchsafed her to mistake those sheltering arms for another's; and she went to her rest murmuring, "oh, mamma, i am so happy--i longed for you--now i can die."two hours later hester made her report.  the mother asked:"how is it with the child?""she is well."chapter viia sheaf of white crape and black was hung upon the door of the house, and there it swayed and rustled in the wind and whispered its tidings.  at noon the preparation of the dead was finished, and in the coffin lay the fair young form, beautiful, and in the sweet face a great peace.  two mourners sat by it, grieving and worshipping--hannah and the black woman tilly.  hester came, and she was trembling, for a great trouble was upon her spirit.  she said:"she asks for a note."hannah's face blanched.  she had not thought of this; it had seemed that that pathetic service was ended.  but she realized now that that could not be.  for a little while the two women stood looking into each other's face, with vacant eyes; then hannah said:"there is no way out of it--she must have it; she will suspect, else.""and she would find out.""yes.  it would break her heart."  she looked at the dead face, and her eyes filled.  "i will write it," she said.hester carried it.  the closing line said:"darling mousie, dear sweet mother, we shall soon be together again.  is not that good news?  and it is true; they all say it is true."the mother mourned, saying:"poor child, how will she bear it when she knows?  i shall never see her again in life.  it is hard, so hard.  she does not suspect?  you guard her from that?""she thinks you will soon be well.""how good you are, and careful, dear aunt hester!  none goes near her who could carry the infection?""it would be a crime.""but you see her?""with a distance between--yes.""that is so good.  others one could not trust; but you two guardian angels--steel is not so true as you.  others would be unfaithful; and many would deceive, and lie."hester's eyes fell, and her poor old lips trembled."let me kiss you for her, aunt hester; and when i am gone, and the danger is past, place the kiss upon her dear lips some day, and say her mother sent it, and all her mother's broken heart is in it."within the hour, hester, raining tears upon the dead face, performed her pathetic mission.chapter viiianother day dawned, and grew, and spread its sunshine in the earth.  aunt hannah brought comforting news to the failing mother, and a happy note, which said again, "we have but a little time to wait, darling mother, then se shall be together."the deep note of a bell came moaning down the wind."aunt hannah, it is tolling.  some poor soul is at rest.  as i shall be soon.  you will not let her forget me?""oh, god knows she never will!""do not you hear strange noises, aunt hannah?  it sounds like the shuffling of many feet.""we hoped you would not hear it, dear.  it is a little company gathering, for--for helen's sake, poor little prisoner.  there will be music--and she loves it so.  we thought you would not mind.""mind?  oh no, no--oh, give her everything her dear heart can desire.  how good you two are to her, and how good to me!  god bless you both always!"after a listening pause:"how lovely!  it is her organ.  is she playing it herself, do you think?"  faint and rich and inspiring the chords floating to her ears on the still air.  "yes, it is her touch, dear heart, i recognize it.  they are singing.  why--it is a hymn! and the sacredest of all, the most touching, the most consoling.  . . . it seems to open the gates of paradise to me.  . . . if i could die now.  . . ."faint and far the words rose out of the stillness:nearer, my god, to thee,nearer to thee,e'en though it be a crossthat raiseth me.with the closing of the hymn another soul passed to its rest, and they that had been one in life were not sundered in death.  the sisters, mourning and rejoicing, said:"how blessed it was that she never knew!"chapter ixat midnight they sat together, grieving, and the angel of the lord appeared in the midst transfigured with a radiance not of earth; and speaking, said:"for liars a place is appointed.  there they burn in the fires of hell from everlasting unto everlasting.  repent!"the bereaved fell upon their knees before him and clasped their hands and bowed their gray heads, adoring.  but their tongues clove to the roof of their mouths, and they were dumb."speak! that i may bear the message to the chancery of heaven and bring again the decree from which there is no appeal."then they bowed their heads yet lower, and one said:"our sin is great, and we suffer shame; but only perfect and final repentance can make us whole; and we are poor creatures who have learned our human weakness, and we know that if we were in those hard straits again our hearts would fail again, and we should sin as before. the strong could prevail, and so be saved, but we are lost."they lifted their heads in supplication.  the angel was gone.  while they marveled and wept he came again; and bending low, he whispered the decree.chapter xwas it heaven?  or hell?ithe day before christmas, in the year of our lord 722.broad snow-meadows glistening white along the banks of the river moselle; steep hill-sides blooming with mystic forget-me-not where the glow of the setting sun cast long shadows down their eastern slope; an arch of clearest, deepest gentian bending overhead; in the centre of the aerial garden the walls of the cloister of pfalzel, steel-blue to the east, violet to the west; silence over all,--a gentle, eager, conscious stillness, diffused through the air, as if earth and sky were hushing themselves to hear the voice of the river faintly murmuring down the valley.in the cloister, too, there was silence at the sunset hour. all day long there had been a strange and joyful stir among the nuns. a breeze of curiosity and excitement had swept along the corridors and through every quiet cell. a famous visitor had come to the convent.it was winfried of england, whose name in the roman tongue was boniface, and whom men called the apostle of germany. a great preacher; a wonderful scholar; but, more than all, a daring traveller, a venturesome pilgrim, a priest of romance.he had left his home and his fair estate in wessex; he would not stay in the rich monastery of nutescelle, even though they had chosen him as the abbot; he had refused a bishopric at the court of king karl. nothing would content him but to go out into the wild woods and preach to the heathen.through the forests of hesse and thuringia, and along the borders of saxony, he had wandered for years, with a handful of companions, sleeping under the trees, crossing mountains and marshes, now here, now there, never satisfied with ease and comfort, always in love with hardship and danger.what a man he was! fair and slight, but straight as a spear and strong as an oaken staff. his face was still young; the smooth skin was bronzed by wind and sun. his gray eyes, clean and kind, flashed like fire when he spoke of his adventures, and of the evil deeds of the false priests with whom he contended.what tales he had told that day! not of miracles wrought by sacred relics; not of courts and councils and splendid cathedrals; though he knew much of these things. but to-day he had spoken of long journeyings by sea and land; of perils by fire and flood; of wolves and bears, and fierce snowstorms, and black nights in the lonely forest; of dark altars of heathen gods, and weird, bloody sacrifices, and narrow escapes from murderous bands of wandering savages.the little novices had gathered around him, and their faces had grown pale and their eyes bright as they listened with parted lips, entranced in admiration, twining their arms about one another's shoulders and holding closely together, half in fear, half in delight. the older nuns had turned from their tasks and paused, in passing by, to bear the pilgrim's story. too well they knew the truth of what he spoke. many a one among them had seen the smoke rising from the ruins of her father's roof. many a one had a brother far away in the wild country to whom her heart went out night and day, wondering if he were still among the living.but now the excitements of that wonderful day were over; the hour of the evening meal had come; the inmates of the cloister were assembled in the refectory.on the dais sat the stately abbess addula, daughter of king dagobert, looking a princess indeed, in her purple tunic, with the hood and cuffs of her long white robe trimmed with ermine, and a snowy veil resting like a crown on her silver hair. at her right hand was the honoured guest, and at her left hand her grandson, the young prince gregor, a big, manly boy, just returned from school.the long, shadowy hall, with its dark-brown rafters and beams; the double row of nuns, with their pure veils and fair faces; the ruddy glow of the slanting sunbeams striking upward through the tops of the windows and painting a pink glow high up on the walls,--it was all as beautiful as a picture, and as silent. for this was the rule of the cloister, that at the table all should sit in stillness for a little while, and then one should read aloud, while the rest listened."it is the turn of my grandson to read to-day," said the abbess to winfried; "we shall see how much he has learned in the school. read, gregor; the place in the book is marked."the lad rose from his seat and turned the pages of the manuscript. it was a copy of jerome's version of the scriptures in latin, and the marked place was in the letter of st. paul to the ephesians,--the passage where he describes the preparation of the christian as a warrior arming for battle. the young voice rang out clearly, rolling the sonorous words, without slip or stumbling, to the end of the chapter.winfried listened smiling. "that was bravely read, my son," said he, as the reader paused. "understandest thou what thou readest?""surely, father," answered the boy; "it was taught me by the masters at treves; and we have read this epistle from beginning to end, so that i almost know it by heart."then he began to repeat the passage, turning away from the page as if to show his skill.but winfried stopped him with a friendly lifting of the hand."not so, my son; that was not my meaning. when we pray, we speak to god. when we read, god speaks to us. i ask whether thou hast heard what he has said to thee in the common speech. come, give us again the message of the warrior and his armour and his battle, in the mother-tongue, so that all can understand it."the boy hesitated, blushed, stammered; then he came around to winfried's seat, bringing the book. "take the book, my father," he cried, "and read it for me. i cannot see the meaning plain, though i love the sound of the words. religion i know, and the doctrines of our faith, and the life of priests and nuns in the cloister, for which my grandmother designs me, though it likes me little. and fighting i know, and the life of warriors and heroes, for i have read of it in virgil and the ancients, and heard a bit from the soldiers at treves; and i would fain taste more of it, for it likes me much. but how the two lives fit together, or what need there is of armour for a clerk in holy orders, i can never see. tell me the meaning, for if there is a man in all the world that knows it, i am sure it is thou."so winfried took the book and closed it, clasping the boy's hand with his own."let us first dismiss the others to their vespers said he, "lest they should be weary."a sign from the abbess; a chanted benediction; a murmuring of sweet voices and a soft rustling of many feet over the rushes on the floor; the gentle tide of noise flowed out through the doors and ebbed away down the corridors; the three at the head of the table were left alone in the darkening room.then winfried began to translate the parable of the soldier into the realities of life.at every turn he knew how to flash a new light into the picture out of his own experience. he spoke of the combat with self, and of the wrestling with dark spirits in solitude. he spoke of the demons that men had worshipped for centuries in the wilderness, and whose malice they invoked against the stranger who ventured into the gloomy forest. gods, they called them, and told weird tales of their dwelling among the impenetrable branches of the oldest trees and in the caverns of the shaggy hills; of their riding on the wind-horses and hurling spears of lightning against their foes. gods they were not, but foul spirits of the air, rulers of the darkness. was there not glory and honour in fighting them, in daring their anger under the shield of faith, in putting them to flight with the sword of truth? what better adventure could a brave man ask than to go forth against them, and wrestle with them, and conquer them?"look you, my friends," said winfried, "how sweet and peaceful is this convent to-night! it is a garden full of flowers in the heart of winter; a nest among the branches of a great tree shaken by the winds; a still haven on the edge of a tempestuous sea. and this is what religion means for those who are chosen and called to quietude and prayer and meditation."but out yonder in the wide forest, who knows what storms are raving to-night in the hearts of men, though all the woods are still? who knows what haunts of wrath and cruelty are closed tonight against the advent of the prince of peace? and shall i tell you what religion means to those who are called and chosen to dare, and to fight, and to conquer the world for christ? it means to go against the strongholds of the adversary. it means to struggle to win an entrance for the master everywhere. what helmet is strong enough for this strife save the helmet of salvation? what breastplate can guard a man against these fiery darts but the breastplate of righteousness? what shoes can stand the wear of these journeys but the preparation of the gospel of peace?""shoes?" he cried again, and laughed as if a sudden thought had struck him. he thrust out his foot, covered with a heavy cowhide boot, laced high about his leg with thongs of skin."look here,--how a fighting man of the cross is shod! i have seen the boots of the bishop of tours,--white kid, broidered with silk; a day in the bogs would tear them to shreds. i have seen the sandals that the monks use on the highroads,--yes, and worn them; ten pair of them have i worn out and thrown away in a single journey. now i shoe my feet with the toughest hides, hard as iron; no rock can cut them, no branches can tear them. yet more than one pair of these have i outworn, and many more shall i outwear ere my journeys are ended. and i think, if god is gracious to me, that i shall die wearing them. better so than in a soft bed with silken coverings. the boots of a warrior, a hunter, a woodsman,--these are my preparation of the gospel of peace."come, gregor," he said, laying his brown hand on the youth's shoulder, "come, wear the forester's boots with me. this is the life to which we are called. be strong in the lord, a hunter of the demons, a subduer of the wilderness, a woodsman of the faith. come."the boy's eyes sparkled. he turned to his grandmother. she shook her head vigorously."nay, father," she said, "draw not the lad away from my side with these wild words. i need him to help me with my labours, to cheer my old age.""do you need him more than the master does?" asked winfried; "and will you take the wood that is fit for a bow to make a distaff?""but i fear for the child. thy life is too hard for him. he will perish with hunger in the woods.""once," said winfried, smiling, "we were camped on the bank of the river ohru. the table was set for the morning meal, but my comrades cried that it was empty; the provisions were exhausted; we must go without breakfast, and perhaps starve before we could escape from the wilderness. while they complained, a fish-hawk flew up from the river with flapping wings, and let fall a great pike in the midst of the camp. there was food enough and to spare! never have i seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.""but the fierce pagans of the forest," cried the abbess,--"they may pierce the boy with their arrows, or dash out his brains with their axes. he is but a child, too young for the danger and the strife.""a child in years," replied winfried, "but a man in spirit. and if the hero fall early in the battle, he wears the brighter crown, not a leaf withered, not a flower fallen."the aged princess trembled a little. she drew gregor close to her side, and laid her hand gently on his brown hair. "i am not sure that he wants to leave me yet. besides, there is no horse in the stable to give him, now, and he cannot go as befits the grandson of a king."gregor looked straight into her eyes."grandmother," said he, "dear grandmother, if thou wilt not give me a horse to ride with this man of god, i will go with him afoot."iitwo years had passed since that christmas-eve in the cloister of pfalzel. a little company of pilgrims, less than a score of men, were travelling slowly northward through the wide forest that rolled over the hills of central germany.at the head of the band marched winfried, clad in a tunic of fur, with his long black robe girt high above his waist, so that it might not hinder his stride. his hunter's boots were crusted with snow. drops of ice sparkled like jewels along the thongs that bound his legs. there were no other ornaments of his dress except the bishop's cross hanging on his breast, and the silver clasp that fastened his cloak about his neck. he carried a strong, tall staff in his hand, fashioned at the top into the form of a cross.close beside him, keeping step like a familiar comrade, was the young prince gregor. long marches through the wilderness had stretched his legs and broadened his back, and made a man of him in stature as well as in spirit. his jacket and cap were of wolf-skin, and on his shoulder he carried an axe, with broad, shining blade. he was a mighty woodsman now, and could make a spray of chips fly around him as he hewed his way through the trunk of a pine-tree.behind these leaders followed a pair of teamsters, guiding a rude sledge, loaded with food and the equipage of the camp, and drawn by two big, shaggy horses, blowing thick clouds of steam from their frosty nostrils. tiny icicles hung from the hairs on their lips. their flanks were smoking. they sank above the fetlocks at every step in the soft snow.last of all came the rear guard, armed with bows and javelins. it was no child's play, in those days, to cross europe afoot.the weird woodland, sombre and illimitable, covered hill and vale, table-land and mountain-peak. there were wide moors where the wolves hunted in packs as if the devil drove them, and tangled thickets where the lynx and the boar made their lairs. fierce bears lurked among the rocky passes, and had not yet learned to fear the face of man. the gloomy recesses of the forest gave shelter to inhabitants who were still more cruel and dangerous than beasts of prey,--outlaws and sturdy robbers and mad were-wolves and bands of wandering pillagers.the pilgrim who would pass from the mouth of the tiber to the mouth of the rhine must trust in god and keep his arrows loose in the quiver.the travellers were surrounded by an ocean of trees, so vast, so full of endless billows, that it seemed to be pressing on every side to overwhelm them. gnarled oaks, with branches twisted and knotted as if in rage, rose in groves like tidal waves. smooth forests of beech-trees, round and gray, swept over the knolls and slopes of land in a mighty ground-swell. but most of all, the multitude of pines and firs, innumerable and monotonous, with straight, stark trunks, and branches woven together in an unbroken flood of darkest green, crowded through the valleys and over the hills, rising on the highest ridges into ragged crests, like the foaming edge of breakers.through this sea of shadows ran a narrow stream of shining whiteness,--an ancient roman road, covered with snow. it was as if some great ship had ploughed through the green ocean long ago, and left behind it a thick, smooth wake of foam. along this open track the travellers held their way,--heavily, for the drifts were deep; warily, for the hard winter had driven many packs of wolves down from the moors.the steps of the pilgrims were noiseless; but the sledges creaked over the dry snow, and the panting of the horses throbbed through the still air. the pale-blue shadows on the western side of the road grew longer. the sun, declining through its shallow arch, dropped behind the tree-tops. darkness followed swiftly, as if it had been a bird of prey waiting for this sign to swoop down upon the world."father," said gregor to the leader, "surely this day's march is done. it is time to rest, and eat, and sleep. if we press onward now, we cannot see our steps; and will not that be against the word of the psalmist david, who bids us not to put confidence in the legs of a man?"winfried laughed. "nay, my son gregor," said he, "thou hast tripped, even now, upon thy text. for david said only, 'i take no pleasure in the legs of a man.' and so say i, for i am not minded to spare thy legs or mine, until we come farther on our way, and do what must be done this night. draw thy belt tighter, my son, and hew me out this tree that is fallen across the road, for our campground is not here."the youth obeyed; two of the foresters sprang to help him; and while the soft fir-wood yielded to the stroke of the axes, and the snow flew from the bending branches, winfried turned and spoke to his followers in a cheerful voice, that refreshed them like wine."courage, brothers, and forward yet a little! the moon will light us presently, and the path is plain. well know i that the journey is weary; and my own heart wearies also for the home in england, where those i love are keeping feast this christmas-eve. but we have work to do before we feast to-night. for this is the yuletide, and the heathen people of the forest are gathered at the thunder-oak of geismar to worship their god, thor. strange things will be seen there, and deeds which make the soul black. but we are sent to lighten their darkness; and we will teach our kinsmen to keep a christmas with us such as the woodland has never known. forward, then, and stiffen up the feeble knees!"a murmur of assent came from the men. even the horses seemed to take fresh heart. they flattened their backs to draw the heavy loads, and blew the frost from their nostrils as they pushed ahead.the night grew broader and less oppressive. a gate of brightness was opened secretly somewhere in the sky. higher and higher swelled the clear moon-flood, until it poured over the eastern wall of forest into the road. a drove of wolves howled faintly in the distance, but they were receding, and the sound soon died away. the stars sparkled merrily through the stringent air; the small, round moon shone like silver; little breaths of dreaming wind wandered across the pointed fir-tops, as the pilgrims toiled bravely onward, following their clew of light through a labyrinth of darkness.after a while the road began to open out a little. there were spaces of meadow-land, fringed with alders, behind which a boisterous river ran clashing through spears of ice.rude houses of hewn logs appeared in the openings, each one casting a patch of inky shadow upon the snow. then the travellers passed a larger group of dwellings, all silent and unlighted; and beyond, they saw a great house, with many outbuildings and inclosed courtyards, from which the hounds bayed furiously, and a noise of stamping horses came from the stalls. but there was no other sound of life. the fields around lay naked to the moon. they saw no man, except that once, on a path that skirted the farther edge of a meadow, three dark figures passed them, running very swiftly.then the road plunged again into a dense thicket, traversed it, and climbing to the left, emerged suddenly upon a glade, round and level except at the northern side, where a hillock was crowned with a huge oak-tree. it towered above the heath, a giant with contorted arms, beckoning to the host of lesser trees. "here," cried winfried, as his eyes flashed and his hand lifted his heavy staff, "here is the thunder-oak; and here the cross of christ shall break the hammer of the false god thor."withered leaves still clung to the branches of the oak: torn and faded banners of the departed summer. the bright crimson of autumn had long since disappeared, bleached away by the storms and the cold. but to-night these tattered remnants of glory were red again: ancient bloodstains against the dark-blue sky. for an immense fire had been kindled in front of the tree. tongues of ruddy flame, fountains of ruby sparks, ascended through the spreading limbs and flung a fierce illumination upward and around. the pale, pure moonlight that bathed the surrounding forests was quenched and eclipsed here. not a beam of it sifted through the branches of the oak. it stood like a pillar of cloud between the still light of heaven and the crackling, flashing fire of earth.but the fire itself was invisible to winfried and his companions. a great throng of people were gathered around it in a half-circle, their backs to the open glade, their faces toward the oak. seen against that glowing background, it was but the silhouette of a crowd, vague, black, formless, mysterious.the travellers paused for a moment at the edge of the thicket, and took counsel together."it is the assembly of the tribe," said one of the foresters, "the great night of the council. i heard of it three days ago, as we passed through one of the villages. all who swear by the old gods have been summoned. they will sacrifice a steed to the god of war, and drink blood, and eat horse-flesh to make them strong. it will be at the peril of our lives if we approach them. at least we must hide the cross, if we would escape death.""hide me no cross," cried winfried, lifting his staff, "for i have come to show it, and to make these blind folk see its power. there is more to be done here to-night than the slaying of a steed, and a greater evil to be stayed than the shameful eating of meat sacrificed to idols. i have seen it in a dream. here the cross must stand and be our rede."at his command the sledge was left in the border of the wood, with two of the men to guard it, and the rest of the company moved forward across the open ground. they approached unnoticed, for all the multitude were looking intently toward the fire at the foot of the oak.then winfried's voice rang out, "hail, ye sons of the forest! a stranger claims the warmth of your fire in the winter night."swiftly, and as with a single motion, a thousand eyes were bent upon the speaker. the semicircle opened silently in the middle; winfried entered with his followers; it closed again behind them.then, as they looked round the curving ranks, they saw that the hue of the assemblage was not black, but white,--dazzling, radiant, solemn. white, the robes of the women clustered together at the points of the wide crescent; white, the glittering byrnies of the warriors standing in close ranks; white, the fur mantles of the aged men who held the central palace in the circle; white, with the shimmer of silver ornaments and the purity of lamb's-wool, the raiment of a little group of children who stood close by the fire; white, with awe and fear, the faces of all who looked at them; and over all the flickering, dancing radiance of the flames played and glimmered like a faint, vanishing tinge of blood on snow.the only figure untouched by the glow was the old priest, hunrad, with his long, spectral robe, flowing hair and beard, and dead-pale face, who stood with his back to the fire and advanced slowly to meet the strangers."who are you? whence come you, and what seek you here?""your kinsman am i, of the german brotherhood," answered winfried, "and from england, beyond the sea, have i come to bring you a greeting from that land, and a message from the all-father, whose servant i am.""welcome, then," said hunrad, "welcome, kinsman, and be silent; for what passes here is too high to wait, and must be done before the moon crosses the middle heaven, unless, indeed, thou hast some sign or token from the gods. canst thou work miracles?"the question came sharply, as if a sudden gleam of hope had flashed through the tangle of the old priest's mind. but winfried's voice sank lower and a cloud of disappointment passed over his face as he replied: "nay, miracles have i never wrought, though i have heard of many; but the all-father has given no power to my hands save such as belongs to common man.""stand still, then, thou common man," said hunrad, scornfully, "and behold what the gods have called us hither to do. this night is the death-night of the sun-god, baldur the beautiful, beloved of gods and men. this night is the hour of darkness and the power of winter, of sacrifice and mighty fear. this night the great thor, the god of thunder and war, to whom this oak is sacred, is grieved for the death of baldur, and angry with this people because they have forsaken his worship. long is it since an offering has been laid upon his altar, long since the roots of his holy tree have been fed with blood. therefore its leaves have withered before the time, and its boughs are heavy with death. therefore the slavs`and the wends have beaten us in battle. therefore the harvests have failed, and the wolf-hordes have ravaged the folds, and the strength has departed from the bow, and the wood of the spear has broken, and the wild boar has slain the huntsman. therefore the plague has fallen on our dwellings, and the dead are more than the living in all our villages. answer me, ye people, are not these things true? "a hoarse sound of approval ran through the circle. a chant, in which the voices of the men and women blended, like the shrill wind in the pinetrees above the rumbling thunder of a waterfall, rose and fell in rude cadences.o thor, the thunderer       mighty and merciless,       spare us from smiting!       heave not thy hammer,       angry, aginst us;       plague not thy people.       take from our treasure       richest of ransom.       silver we send thee,       jewels and javelins,       goodliest garments,       all our possessions,       priceless, we proffer.       sheep will we slaughter,       steeds will we sacrifice;       bright blood shall bathe       o tree of thunder,       life-floods shall lave thee,       strong wood of wonder.       mighty, have mercy,       smile as no more,       spare us and save us,       spare us, thor!  thor!with two great shouts the song ended, and stillness followed so intense that the crackling of the fire was heard distinctly. the old priest stood silent for a moment. his shaggy brows swept down ever his eyes like ashes quenching flame. then he lifted his face and spoke."none of these things will please the god. more costly is the offering that shall cleanse your sin, more precious the crimson dew that shall send new life into this holy tree of blood. thor claims your dearest and your noblest gift."hunrad moved nearer to the group of children who stood watching the fire and the swarms of spark-serpents darting upward. they had heeded none of the priest's words, and did not notice now that he approached them, so eager were they to see which fiery snake would go highest among the oak branches. foremost among them, and most intent on the pretty game, was a boy like a sunbeam, slender and quick, with blithe brown eyes and laughing lips. the priest's hand was laid upon his shoulder. the boy turned and looked up in his face."here," said the old man, with his voice vibrating as when a thick rope is strained by a ship swinging from her moorings, "here is the chosen one, the eldest son of the chief, the darling of the people. hearken, bernhard, wilt thou go to valhalla, where the heroes dwell with the gods, to bear a message to thor?"the boy answered, swift and clear:"yes, priest, i will go if my father bids me. is it far away? shall i run quickly? must i take my bow and arrows for the wolves?"the boy's father, the chieftain gundhar, standing among his bearded warriors, drew his breath deep, and leaned so heavily on the handle of his spear that the wood cracked. and his wife, irma, bending forward from the ranks of women, pushed the golden hair from her forehead with one hand. the other dragged at the silver chain about her neck until the rough links pierced her flesh, and the red drops fell unheeded on her breast.a sigh passed through the crowd, like the murmur of the forest before the storm breaks. yet no one spoke save hunrad:"yes, my prince, both bow and spear shalt thou have, for the way is long, and thou art a brave huntsman. but in darkness thou must journey for a little space, and with eyes blindfolded. fearest thou?""naught fear i," said the boy, "neither darkness, nor the great bear, nor the were-wolf. for i am gundhar's son, and the defender of my folk."then the priest led the child in his raiment of lamb's-wool to a broad stone in front of the fire. he gave him his little bow tipped with silver, and his spear with shining head of steel. he bound the child's eyes with a white cloth, and bade him kneel beside the stone with his face to the cast. unconsciously the wide arc of spectators drew inward toward the centre, as the ends of the bow draw together when the cord is stretched. winfried moved noiselessly until he stood close behind the priest.the old man stooped to lift a black hammer of stone from the ground,--the sacred hammer of the god thor. summoning all the strength of his withered arms, he swung it high in the air. it poised for an instant above the child's fair head--then turned to fall.one keen cry shrilled out from where the women stood: "me! take me! not bernhard!"the flight of the mother toward her child was swift as the falcon's swoop. but swifter still was the hand of the deliverer.winfried's heavy staff thrust mightily against the hammer's handle as it fell. sideways it glanced from the old man's grasp, and the black stone, striking on the altar's edge, split in twain. a shout of awe and joy rolled along the living circle. the branches of the oak shivered. the flames leaped higher. as the shout died away the people saw the lady irma, with her arms clasped round her child, and above them, on the altar-stone, winfried, his face shining like the face of an angel.iva swift mountain-flood rolling down its channel; a huge rock tumbling from the hill-side and falling in mid-stream: the baffled waters broken and confused, pausing in their flow, dash high against the rock, foaming and murmuring, with divided impulse, uncertain whether to turn to the right or the left.even so winfried's bold deed fell into the midst of the thoughts and passions of the council. they were at a standstill. anger and wonder, reverence and joy and confusion surged through the crowd. they knew not which way to move: to resent the intrusion of the stranger as an insult to their gods, or to welcome him as the rescuer of their prince.the old priest crouched by the altar, silent. conflicting counsels troubled the air. let the sacrifice go forward; the gods must be appeased. nay, the boy must not die; bring the chieftain's best horse and slay it in his stead; it will be enough; the holy tree loves the blood of horses. not so, there is a better counsel yet; seize the stranger whom the gods have led hither as a victim and make his life pay the forfeit of his daring.the withered leaves on the oak rustled and whispered overhead. the fire flared and sank again. the angry voices clashed against each other and fell like opposing waves. then the chieftain gundhar struck the earth with his spear and gave his decision."all have spoken, but none are agreed. there is no voice of the council. keep silence now, and let the stranger speak. his words shall give us judgment, whether he is to live or to die."winfried lifted himself high upon the altar, drew a roll of parchment from his bosom, and began to read."a letter from the great bishop of rome, who sits on a golden throne, to the people of the forest, hessians and thuringians, franks and saxons. in nomin domini, sanctae et individuae trinitatis, amen!"a murmur of awe ran through the crowd. "it is the sacred tongue of the romans; the tongue that is heard and understood by the wise men of every land. there is magic in it. listen!"winfried went on to read the letter, translating it into the speech of the people."we have sent unto you our brother boniface, and appointed him your bishop, that he may teach you the only true faith, and baptise you, and lead you back from the ways of error to the path of salvation. hearken to him in all things like a father. bow your hearts to his teaching. he comes not for earthly gain, but for the gain of your souls. depart from evil works. worship not the false gods, for they are devils. offer no more bloody sacrifices, nor eat the flesh of horses, but do as our brother boniface commands you. build a house for him that he may dwell among you, and a church where you may offer your prayers to the only living god, the almighty king of heaven."it was a splendid message: proud, strong, peaceful, loving. the dignity of the words imposed mightily upon the hearts of the people. they were quieted as men who have listened to a lofty strain of music."tell us, then," said gundhar, "what is the word that thou bringest to us from the almighty? what is thy counsel for the tribes of the woodland on this night of sacrifice?""this is the word, and this is the counsel," answered winfried. "not a drop of blood shall fall to-night, save that which pity has drawn from the breast of your princess, in love for her child. not a life shall be blotted out in the darkness to-night; but the great shadow of the tree which hides you from the light of heaven shall be swept away. for this is the birth-night of the white christ, son of the all-father, and saviour of mankind. fairer is he than baldur the beautiful, greater than odin the wise, kinder than freya the good. since he has come to earth the bloody sacrifice must cease. the dark thor, on whom you vainly call, is dead. deep in the shades of niffelheim he is lost forever. his power in the world is broken. will you serve a helpless god? see, my brothers, you call this tree his oak. does he dwell here? does he protect it?"a troubled voice of assent rose from the throng. the people stirred uneasily. women covered their eyes. hunrad lifted his head and muttered hoarsely, "thor! take vengeance! thor!"winfried beckoned to gregor. "bring the axes, thine and one for me. now, young woodsman, show thy craft! the king-tree of the forest must fall, and swiftly, or all is lost!"the two men took their places facing each other, one on each side of the oak. their cloaks were flung aside, their heads bare. carefully they felt the ground with their feet, seeking a firm grip of the earth. firmly they grasped the axe-helves and swung the shining blades."tree-god!" cried winfried, "art thou angry? thus we smite thee!""tree-god!" answered gregor, "art thou mighty? thus we fight thee!"clang! clang! the alternate strokes beat time upon the hard, ringing wood. the axe-heads glittered in their rhythmic flight, like fierce eagles circling about their quarry.the broad flakes of wood flew from the deepening gashes in the sides of the oak. the huge trunk quivered. there was a shuddering in the branches. then the great wonder of winfried's life came to pass.out of the stillness of the winter night, a mighty rushing noise sounded overhead.was it the ancient gods on their white battlesteeds, with their black hounds of wrath and their arrows of lightning, sweeping through the air to destroy their foes?a strong, whirling wind passed over the treetops. it gripped the oak by its branches and tore it from the roots. backward it fell, like a ruined tower, groaning and crashing as it split asunder in four great pieces.winfried let his axe drop, and bowed his head for a moment in the presence of almighty power.then he turned to the people, "here is the timber," he cried, "already felled and split for your new building. on this spot shall rise a chapel to the true god and his servant st. peter."and here," said he, as his eyes fell on a young fir-tree, standing straight and green, with its top pointing toward the stars, amid the divided ruins of the fallen oak, "here is the living tree, with no stain of blood upon it, that shall be the sign of your new worship. see how it points to the sky. call it the tree of the christ-child. take it up and carry it to the chieftain's hall. you shall go no more into the shadows of the forest to keep your feasts with secret rites of shame. you shall keep them at home, with laughter and songs and rites of love. the thunder-oak has fallen, and i think the day is coming when there shall not be a home in all germany where the children are not gathered around the green fir-tree to rejoice in the birth-night of christ."so they took the little fir from its place, and carried it in joyous procession to the edge of the glade, and laid it on the sledge. the horses tossed their heads and drew their load bravely, as if the new burden had made it lighter.when they came to the house of gundhar, he bade them throw open the doors of the hall and set the tree in the midst of it. they kindled lights among the branches until it seemed to be tangled full of fire-flies. the children encircled it, wondering, and the sweet odour of the balsam filled the house.then winfried stood beside the chair of gundhar, on the dais at the end of the hall, and told the story of bethlehem; of the babe in the manger, of the shepherds on the hills, of the host of angels and their midnight song. all the people listened, charmed into stillness.but the boy bernhard, on irma's knee, folded in her soft arms, grew restless as the story lengthened, and began to prattle softly at his mother's ear."mother," whispered the child, "why did you cry out so loud, when the priest was going to send me to valhalla?""oh, hush, my child," answered the mother, and pressed him closer to her side."mother," whispered the boy again, laying his finger on the stains upon her breast, "see, your dress is red! what are these stains? did some one hurt you?"the mother closed his mouth with a kiss. "dear, be still, and listen!"the boy obeyed. his eyes were heavy with sleep. but he heard the last words of winfried as he spoke of the angelic messengers, flying over the hills of judea and singing as they flew. the child wondered and dreamed and listened. suddenly his face grew bright. he put his lips close to irma's cheek again."oh, mother!" he whispered very low, "do not speak. do you hear them? those angels have come back again. they are singing now behind the tree."and some say that it was true; but others say that it was only gregor and his companions at the lower end of the hall, chanting their christmas hymn:all glory be to god on high,       and on the earth be peace!       good-will, henceforth, from heaven to man,       begin and never cease.marc girondin had worked in the filing section of the city hall's engineering department for so long that the city was laid out in his mind like a map, full of names and places, intersecting streets and streets that led nowhere, blind alleys and winding lanes.in all montreal no one possessed such knowledge; a dozen policemen and taxi drivers together could not rival him. that is not to say that he actually knew the streets whose names he could recite like a series of incantations, for he did little walking. he knew simply of their existence, where they were, and in what relation they stood to others.but it was enough to make him a specialist. he was undisputed expert of the filing cabinets where all the particulars of all the streets from abbott to zotique were indexed, back, forward and across. those aristocrats, the engineers, the inspectors of water mains and the like, all came to him when they wanted some little particular, some detail, in a hurry they might despise him as a lowly clerk, but they needed him all the same.marc much preferred his office, despite the profound lack of excitement of his work, to his room on oven street (running north and south from sherbrooke east to st. catherine), where his neighbors were noisy and sometimes violent, and his landlady consistently so. he tried to explain the meaning of his existence once to a fellow tenant, louis, but without much success. louis, when he got the drift, was apt to sneer."so craig latches on to bleury and bleury gets to be park, so who cares? why the excitement?""i will show you," said marc. "tell me, first, where you live.""are you crazy? here on oven street. where else?""how do you know?""how do i know? i'm here, ain't i? i pay my rent, don't i? i get my mail here, don't i?"marc shook his head patiently."none of that is evidence," he said. "you live here on oven street because it says so in my filing cabinet at city hall. the post office sends you mail because my card index tells it to. if my cards didn't say so, you wouldn't exist and oven street wouldn't either. that, my friend, is the triumph of bureaucracy."louis walked away in disgust. "try telling that to the landlady," he muttered.so marc continued on his undistinguished career, his fortieth birthday came and went without remark, day after day passed uneventfully. a street was renamed, another constructed, a third widened; it all went carefully into the files, back, forward and across.and then something happened that filled him with amazement, shocked him beyond measure, and made the world of the filing cabinets tremble to their steel bases.one august afternoon, opening a drawer to its fullest extent, he felt something catch. exploring farther, he discovered a card stuck at the back between the top and bottom. he drew it out and found it to be an old index card, dirty and torn, but still perfectly decipherable. it was labeled rue de la bouteille verte, or green bottle street.marc stared at it in wonder. he had never heard of the place or of anything resembling so odd a name. undoubtedly it had been retitled in some other fashion befitting the modern tendency. he checked the listed details and ruffled confidently through the master file of street names. it was not there. he made another search, careful and protracted, through the cabinets. there was nothing. absolutely nothing.once more he examined the card. there was no mistake. the date of the last regular street inspection was exactly fifteen years, five months and fourteen days ago.as the awful truth burst upon him, marc dropped the card in horror, then pounced on it again fearfully, glancing over his shoulder as he did so.it was a lost, a forgotten street. for fifteen years and more it had existed in the heart of montreal, not half a mile from city hall, and no one had known. it had simply dropped out of sight, a stone in water.in his heart, marc had sometimes dreamed of such a possibility. there were so many obscure places, twisting lanes and streets jumbled together as intricately as an egyptian labyrinth. but of course it could not happen, not with the omniscient file at hand. only it had. and it was dynamite. it would blow the office sky-high.vaguely, in his consternation, marc remembered how, some time after he first started to work, his section had been moved to another floor. the old-fashioned files were discarded and all the cards made out afresh. it must have been at that time that green bottle street was stuck between the upper and lower drawers.he put the card in his pocket and went home to reflect. that night he slept badly and monstrous figures flitted through his dreams. among them appeared a gigantic likeness of his chief going mad and forcing him into a red-hot filing cabinet.the next day he made up his mind. pleading illness, he took the afternoon off and with beating heart went looking for the street.although he knew the location perfectly, he passed it twice and had to retrace his steps. baffled, he closed his eyes, consulted his mind's infallible map and walked directly to the entry. it was so narrow that he could touch the adjoining walls with his outstretched hands. a few feet from the sidewalk was a tall and solid wooden structure, much weather-beaten, with a simple latched door in the center. this he opened and stepped inside. green bottle street lay before him.it was perfectly real, and reassuring as well. on either side of a cobbled pavement were three small houses, six in all, each with a diminutive garden in front, spaced off by low iron palings of a kind that has disappeared except in the oldest quarters. the houses looked extremely neat and well kept and the cobbles appeared to have been recently watered and swept. windowless brick walls of ancient warehouses encircled the six homes and joined at the farther end of the street.at his first glance, marc realized how it had gotten its unusual name. it was exactly like a bottle in shape.with the sun shining on the stones and garden plots, and the blue sky overhead, the street gave him a momentary sense of well-being and peace. it was completely charming, a scene from a print of fifty years ago.a woman who marc guessed was some sixty years of age was watering roses in the garden of the first house to his right. she gazed at him motionless, and the water flowed from her can unheeded to the ground. he took off his hat and announced, "i'm from the city engineering department, madam."the woman recovered herself and set her watering can down."so you have found out at last," she said.at these words, marc's reborn belief that after all he had made a harmless and ridiculous error fled precipitately. there was no mistake."tell me, please," he said tonelessly.it was a curious story. for several years, she said, the tenants of green bottle street had lived in amity with each other and the landlord, who also resided in one of the little houses. the owner became so attached to them that in a gesture of goodwill he deeded them his property, together with a small sum of money, when he died."we paid our taxes," the woman said, "and made out a multitude of forms and answered the questions of various officials at regular intervals about our property. then, after a while, we were sent no notices, so we paid no more taxes. no one bothered us at all. it was a long time before we understood that in some way they'd forgotten about us."marc nodded. of course, if green bottle street had dropped from the ken of city hall, no inspectors would go there, no census takers, no tax collectors. all would pass merrily by, directed elsewhere by the infallible filing cabinet."then michael flanagan, who lives at number four," she went on, "a most interesting man, you must meet him--mr. flanagan called us together and said that if miracles happened, we should aid and abet them. it was he who had the door built and put up at the entrance to keep out passersby or officials who might come along. we used to keep it locked, but it's been so long since anyone came that we don't bother now."oh, there were many little things we had to do, like getting our mail at the post office and never having anything delivered at the door. now almost the only visits we make to the outside world are to buy our food and clothes.""and there has never been any change here all that time?" marc asked."yes, two of our friends died, and their rooms were empty for a while. then jean desselin--he's in number six and sometimes goes into the city--returned with a mr. plonsky, a refugee. mr. plonsky was very tired and worn out with his travelings and gladly moved in with us. miss hunter, in number three, brought home a very nice person--a distant relative, i believe. they quite understand the situation.""and you, madam?" marc inquired."my name is sara trusdale, and i have lived here for more than twenty years. i hope to end my days here as well."she smiled pleasantly at him, apparently forgetting for the moment that he carried in his pocket a grenade that could blow their little world to pieces.all of them, it seemed, had had their troubles, their losses and failures, before they found themselves in this place of refuge, this green bottle street. to marc, conscious of his own unsatisfactory existence, it sounded entrancing. he fingered the card in his pocket uncertainly.   "mr. plonsky and mr. flanagan took a great liking to each other," miss trusdale continued. "both of them have been travelers and they like to talk about the things they have seen. miss hunter plays the piano and gives us concerts. then there's mr. hazard and mr. desselin, who are very fond of chess and who brew wine in the cellar. for myself, i have my flowers and my books. it has been very enjoyable for all of us."marc and miss trusdale sat on her front step for a long time in silence. the sky's blue darkened, the sun disappeared behind the warehouse wall on the left."you remind me of my nephew," miss trusdale said suddenly. "he was a dear boy. i was heartbroken when he died in the influenza epidemic after the war. i'm the last of my family, you know."marc could not recall when he had been spoken to with such simple, if indirect, goodwill. his heart warmed to this old lady. obscurely he felt on the verge of a great moral discovery. he took the card out of his pocket."i found this yesterday in the filing cabinet," he said. "no one else knows about it yet. if it should come out, there would be a great scandal, and no end of trouble for all of you as well. newspaper reporters, tax collectors . . ."he thought again of his landlady, his belligerent neighbors, his room that defied improvement.   "i wonder," he said slowly, "i am a good tenant, and i wonder . . .""oh yes," she leaned forward eagerly, "you could have the top floor of my house. i have more space than i know what to do with. i'm sure it would suit you. you must come and see it right away."the mind of marc girondin, filing clerk, was made up. with a gesture of renunciation he tore the card across and dropped the pieces in the watering can. as far as he was concerned, green bottle street would remain mislaid forever.1one confidential evening, not three months ago, lionel wallace told me this story of the door in the wall.  and at the time i thought that so far as he was concered it was a true story.he told it me with such direct simplicity of conviction that i could not do otherwise than believe in him.  but in the morning, in my own flat, i woke to a different atmosphere; and as i lay in bed and recalled the things he had told me, stripped of the glamour of his earnest slow voice, denuded of the focused, shaded table light, the shadowy atmosphere that wrapped about him and me, and the pleasant bright things, the dessert and glasses and napery of the dinner we had shared, making them for the time a bright little world quite cut off from everyday realities, i saw it all as frankly incredible.  "he was mystifying!" i said, and then:  "how well he did it!âit isn't quite the thing i should have expected of him of all people, to do well."afterwards as i sat up in bed and sipped my morning tea, i found myself trying to account for the flavour of reality that perplexed me in his impossible reminiscences, by supposing they did in some way suggest, present, convey--i hardly know which word to use--experiences it was otherwise impossible to tell.well, i don't resort to that explanation now. i have got over my intervening doubts.  i believe now, as i believed at the moment of telling, that wallace did to the very best of his ability strip the truth of his secret for me.  but whether he himself saw, or only thought he saw, whether he himself was the possessor of an inestimable privilege or the victim of a fantastic dream, i cannot pretend to guess.  even the facts of his death, which ended my doubts for ever, throw no light on that.that much the reader must judge for himself.i forget now what chance comment or criticism of mine moved so reticent a man to confide in me.  he was, i think, defending himself against an imputation of slackness and unreliability i had made in relation to a great public movement, in which he had disappointed me.  but he plunged suddenly.  "i have," he said, "a preoccupation--""i know," he went on, after a pause, "i have been negligent.  the fact is--it isn't a case of ghosts of apparitions--but--it's an odd thing to tell of, redmond--i am haunted.  i am haunted by something--that rather takes the light out of things, that fills me with longingsâ"he paused, checked by that english shyness that so often overcomes us when we speak of moving or grave or beautiful things.  "you were at saint athelstan's all through," he said, and for a moment that seemed to me quite irrelevant.  "well"--and he paused.  then very haltingly at first, but afterwards more easily, he began to tell of the thing that was hidden in his life, the haunting memory of a beauty and happiness that filled his heart with insatiable longings, that made all the interests and spectacle of worldly life seem dull and tedious and vain to him.now that i have the clue to it, the thing seems written visibly in his face.  i have a photograph in which that look of detachment has been caught and intensified.  it reminds me of what a woman once said of him--a woman who had loved him greatly.  "suddenly," she said, "the interest goes out of him.  he forgets you.  he doesn't care a rap for you--under his very noseâ"yet the interest was not always out of him, and when he was holding his attention to a thing wallace could contrive to be an extremely successful man.  his career, indeed, is set with successes.  he left me behind him long ago; he soared up over my head, and cut a figure in the world that i couldn't cut--anyhow.  he was still a year short of forty, and they say now that he would have been in office and very probably in the new cabinet if he had lived.  at school he always beat me without effort--as it were by nature.  we were at school together at saint athelstan's college in west kensington for almost all our school time.  he came into the school as my co-equal, but he left far above me, in a blaze of scholarships and brilliant performance.  yet i think i made a fair average running.  and it was at school i heard first of the "door in the wall"--that i was to hear of a second time only a month before his death.to him at least the door in the wall was a real door, leading through a real wall to immortal realities.  of that i am now quite assured.and it came into his life quite early, when he was a little fellow between five and six.  i remember how, as he sat making his confession to me with a slow gravity, he reasoned and reckoned the date of it.  "there was," he said, "a crimson virginia creeper in it - all one bright uniform crimson, in a clear amber sunshine against a white wall.  that came into the impression somehow, though i don't clearly remember how, and there were horse-chesnut leaves upon the clean pavement ouside the green door.  they were blotched yellow and green, you know, not brown nor dirty, so that they must have been new fallen.  i take it that means october.  i look out for horse-chesnut leaves every year and i ought to know."if i'm right in that, i was about five years and four months old."he was, he said, rather a precocious little boy--he learned to talk at an abnormally early age, and he was so sane and "old-fashioned", as people say, that he was permitted an amount of initiative that most children scarcely attain by seven or eight.  his mother died when he was two, and he was under the less vigilant and authoritative care of a nursery governess.  his father was a stern, pre-occupied lawyer, who gave him little attention and expected great things of him.  for all his brightness he found life grey and dull, i think.  and one day he wandered.he could not recall the particular neglect that enabled him to get away, nor the course he took among the west kensington roads.  all that had faded among the incurable blurs of memory.  but the white wall and the green door stood out quite distinctly.as his memory of that childish experience ran, he did at the very first sight of that door experience a peculiar emotion, and attraction, a desire to get to the door and open it and walk in.  and at the same time he had the clearest conviction that either it was unwise or it was wrong of him--he could not tell which--to yield to this attraction.  he insisted upon it as a curious thing that he knew from the very beginning--unless memory has played him the queerest trick--that the door was unfastened, and that he could go in as he chose.i seem to see the figure of that little boy, drawn and repelled.  and it was very clear in his mind, too, though why it should be so was never explained, that his father would be very angry if he went in through that door.wallace described all these moments of hesitation to me with the utmost particularity.  he went right past the door, and then, with his hands in his pockets and making an infantile attempt to whistle, strolled right along beyond the end of the wall.  there he recalls a number of mean dirty shops, and particularly that of a plumber and decorator with a dusty disorder of earthenware pipes, sheet lead, ball taps, pattern books of wallpaper, and tins of enamel.  he stood pretending to examine these things, and coveting, passionately desiring, the green door.then, he said, he had a gust of emotion.  he made a run for it, lest hesitation should grip him again; he went plumb with outstretched hand through the green door and let it slam behind him.  and so, in a trice, he came into the garden that has haunted all his life.it was very difficult for wallace to give me his full sense of that garden into which he came.there was something in the very air of it that exhilarated, that gave one a sense of lightness and good happening and well-being; there was something in the sight of it that made all its colour clean and perfect and subtly luminous.  in the instant of coming into it one was exquisitely glad--as only in rare moments, and when one is young and joyful one can be glad in this world.  and everything was beautiful thereâwallace mused before he went on telling me.  "you see," he said, with the doubtful inflection of a man who pauses at incredible things, "there were two great panthers thereâ. yes, spotted panthers.  and i was not afraid.  there was a long wide path with marble-edged flower borders on either side, and these two huge velvety beasts were playing there with a ball.  one looked up and came towards me, a little curious as it seemed.  it came right up to me, rubbed its soft round ear very gently against the small hand i held out, and purred.  it was, i tell you, an enchanted garden.  i know.  and the size?  oh! it stretched far and wide, this way and that.  i believe there were hills far away.  heaven knows where west kensington had suddenly got to.  and somehow it was just like coming home."you know, in the very moment the door swung to behind me, i forgot the road with its fallen chestnut leaves, its cabs and tradesmen's carts, i forgot the sort of gravitational pull back to the discipline and obedience of home, i forgot all hesitations and fear, forgot discretion, forgot all the intimate realities of this life. i became in a moment a very glad and wonder-happy little boy--in another world.  it was a world with a different quality, a warmer, more penetrating, and mellower light, with a faint clear gladness in its air, and wisps of sun-touched cloud in the blueness of its sky.  and before me ran this long wide path, invitingly, with weedless beds on either side, rich with untended flowers, and these two great panthers.  i put my little hands fearlessly on their soft fur, and caressed their round ears and the sensitive corners under their ears, and played with them, and it was as though they welcomed me home.  there was a keen sense of homecoming in my mind, and when presently a tall, fair girl appeared in the pathway and came to meet me, smiling, and said, "well?" to me, and lifted me and kissed me and put me down and led me by the hand, there was no amazement, but only an impression of delightful rightness, of being reminded of happy things that had in some strange way been overlooked.  there were broad red steps, i remember, that came into view between spikes of delphinium, and up these we went to a great avenue between very old and shady dark trees.  all down this avenue, you know, between the red chapped stems, were marble seats of honour and statuary, and very tame and friendly white doves."along this cool avenue my girl-friend led me, looking down--i recall the pleasant lines, the finely-modelled chin of her sweet kind face--asking me questions in a soft, agreeable voice, and telling me things, pleasant things, i know, though what they were i was never able to recallâ. presently a capuchin monkey, very clean, with a fur of reddy brown and kindly hazel eyes, came down a tree to us and ran beside me, looking up at me and grinning, and presently leaped to my shoulder.  so we two went on our way in great happiness."he paused."go on," i said."i remember little things. we passed an old man musing among laurels, i remember, and a place gay with parakeets, and came through a broad shaded colonnade to a spacious cool palace, full of pleasant fountains, full of beautiful things, full of the quality and promise of heart's desire.  and there were many things and many people, some that still seem to stand out clearly and some that are vaguer; but all these people were beautiful and kind.  in some way--i don't know how--it was conveyed to me that they all were kind to me, glad to have me there, and filling me with gladness by their gestures, by the touch of their hands, by the welcome and love in their eyes.  yes--"he mused for a while.  "playmates i found there.  that was much to me, because i was a lonely little boy.  they played delightful games in a grass-covered court where there was a sundial set about with flowers.  and as one played one lovedâ."but--it's odd--there's a gap in my memory.  i don't remember the games we played.  i never remembered.  afterwards, as a child, i spent long hours trying, even with tears, to recall the form of that happiness.  i wanted to play it all over again--in my nursery--by myself.  no!  all i remember is the happiness and two dear playfellows who were most with meâ. then presently came a sombre woman, wearing a soft long robe of pale purple, who carried a book, and beckoned and took me aside with her into a gallery above a hall--though my playmates were loth to have me go, and ceased their game and stood watching as i was carried away.  'come back to us!' they cried.  'come back to us soon!'   i looked up at her face, but she heeded them not at all.  her face was very gentle and grave.  she took me to a seat in the gallery, and i stood beside her, ready to look at her book as she opened it upon her knee. the pages fell open.  she pointed, and i looked, marvelling, for in the living pages of that book i saw myself; it was a story about myself, and in it were all the things that had happened to me since ever i was bornâ."it was wonderful to me, because the pages of that book were not pictures, you understand, but realities."wallace paused gravely--looked at me doubtfully."go on," i said.  "i understand.""they were realities--yes, they must have been; people moved and things came and went in them; my dear mother, whom i had near forgotten; then my father, stern and upright, the servants, the nursery, all the familiar things of home. then the front door and the busy streets, with traffic to and fro. i looked and marvelled, and looked half doubtfully again into the woman's face and turned the pages over, skipping this and that, to see more of this book and more, and so at last i came to myself hovering and hesitating outside the green door in the long white wall, and felt again the conflict and the fear."'and next?' i cried, and would have turned on, but the cool hand of the grave woman delayed me."'next?' i insisted, and struggled gently with her hand, pulling up her fingers with all my childish strength, and as she yielded and the page came over she bent down upon me like a shadow and kissed my brow."but the page did not show the enchanted garden, nor the panthers, nor the girl who had led me by the hand, nor the playfellows who had been so loth to let me go.  it showed a long grey street in west kensington, in that chill hour of afternnon before the lamps are lit; and i was there, a wretched little figure, weeping aloud, for all that i could do to restrain myself, and i was weeping because i could not return to my dear playfellows who had called after me, 'come back to us!  come back to us soon!'  i was there.  this was no page in a book, but harsh reality; that enchanted place and the restraining hand of the grave mother at whose knee i stood had gone--whither had they gone?"he halted again, and remained for a time staring into the fire."oh! the woefulness of that return!" he murmured."well?" i said, after a minute or so."poor little wretch i was!--brought back to this grey world again! as i realized the fullness of what had happened to me, i gave way to quite ungovernable grief. and the shame and humiliation of that public weeping and my disgraceful home-coming remain with me still.  i see again the benevolent-looking old gentleman in gold spectacles who stopped and spoke to me--prodding me first with his umbrella.  'poor little chap,' said he; 'and are you lost then?'--and me a london boy of five and more!  and he must needs bring in a kindly young policeman and make a crowd of me, and so march me home. sobbing, conspicuous, and frightened, i came back from the enchanted garden to the steps of my father's house."that is as well as i can remember my vision of that garden--the garden that haunts me still.  of course, i can convey nothing of that indescribable quality of translucent unreality, that difference from the common things of experience that hung about it all; but that--that is what happened.  if it was a dream, i am sure it was a day-time and altogether extraordinary dreamâ. h'm!--naturally there followed a terrible questioning, by my aunt, my father, the nurse, the governess--everyoneâ."i tried to tell them, and my father gave me my first thrashing for telling lies.  when afterwards i tried to tell my aunt, she punished me again for my wicked persistence. then, as i said, everyone was forbidden to listen to me, to hear a word about it.  even my fairy-tale books were taken away from me for a time--because i was too 'imaginative'.  eh!  yes, they did that!  my father belonged to the old schoolâ. and my story was driven back upon myself.  i whispered it to my pillow--my pillow that was often damp and salt to my whispering lips with childish tears.  and i added always to my official and less fervent prayers this one heartfelt request:  'please god i may dream of the garden.  o! take me back to my garden.'  take me back to my garden!  i dreamt often of the garden.  i may have added to it, i may have changed it; i do not knowâ. all this, you understand, is an attempt to reconstruct from fragmentary memories a very early experience.  between that and the other consecutive memories of my boyhood there is a gulf.  a time came when it seemed impossible i should ever speak of that wonder glimpse again."i asked an obvious question."no," he said, "i don't remember that i ever attempted to find my way back to the garden in those early years.  this seems odd to me now, but i think that very probably a closer watch was kept on my movements after this misadventure to prevent my going astray.  no, it wasn't till you knew me that i tried for the garden again.  and i believe there was a period--incredible as it seems now--when i forgot the garden altogether-- when i was about eight or nine it may have been.  do you remember me as a kid at saint athelstan's?""rather!""i didn't show any signs, did i, in those days of having a secret dream?"2he looked up with a sudden smile."did you ever play north-west passage with me? . . .  no, of course you didn't come my way!""it was the sort of game," he went on, "that every imaginative child plays all day.  the idea was the discovery of a north-west passage to school.  the way to school was plain enough; the game consisted in finding some way that wasn't plain, starting off ten minutes early in some almost hopeless direction, and working one`s way round through unaccustomed streets to my goal.  and one day i got entangled among some rather low-class streets on the other side of campden hill, and i began to think that for once the game would be against me and that i should get to school late.  i tried rather desperately a street that seemed a cul de sac, and found a passage at the end.  i hurried through that with renewed hope.  'i shall do it yet,' i said, and passed a row of frowsy little shops that were inexplicably familiar to me, and behold! there was my long white wall and the green door that led to the enchanted garden!"the thing whacked upon me suddenly.  then, after all, that garden, that wonderful garden, wasn't a dream!" . . . .he paused."i suppose my second experience with the green door marks the world of difference there is between the busy life of a schoolboy and the infinite leisure of a child.  anyhow, this second time i didn't for a moment think of going in straight away.  you see . . .  for one thing my mind was full of the idea of getting to school in time--set on not breaking my record for punctuality.  i must surely have felt some little desire at least to try the door--yes, i must have felt that . . .  but i seem to remember the attraction of the door mainly as another obstacle to my overmastering determination to get to school.  i was immediately interested by this discovery i had made, of course--i went on with my mind full of it--but i went on.  it didn't check me.  i ran past tugging out my watch, found i had ten minutes still to spare, and then i was going downhill into familiar surroundings.  i got to school, breathless, it is true, and wet with perspiration, but in time.  i can remember hanging up my coat and hat . . . went right by it and left it behind me.  odd, eh?"he looked at me thoughtfully.  "of course, i didn't know then that it wouldn't always be there.  school boys have limited imaginations.  i suppose i thought it was an awfully jolly thing to have it there, to know my way back to it, but there was the school tugging at me.  i expect i was a good deal distraught and inattentive that morning, recalling what i could of the beautiful strange people i should presently see again.  oddly enough i had no doubt in my mind that they would be glad to see me . . . yes, i must have thought of the garden that morning just as a jolly sort of place to which one might resort in the interludes of a strenuous scholastic career."i didn't go that day at all.  the next day was a half holiday, and that may have weighed with me.  perhaps, too, my state of inattention brought down impositions upon me and docked the margin of time necessary for the detour.  i don't know.  what i do know is that in the meantime the enchanted garden was so much upon my mind that i could not keep it to myself."i told--what was his name?--a ferrety-looking youngster we used to call squiff.""young hopkins," said i."hopkins it was.  i did not like telling him, i had a feeling that in some way it was against the rules to tell him, but i did.  he was walking part of the way home with me; he was talkative, and if we had not talked about the enchanted garden we should have talked of something else, and it was intolerable to me to think about any other subject.  so i blabbed."well, he told my secret.  the next day in the play interval i found myself surrounded by half a dozen bigger boys, half teasing and wholly curious to hear more of the enchanted garden.  there was that big fawcett--you remember him?--and carnaby and morley reynolds.  you weren't there by any chance?  no, i think i should have remembered if you were . . ."a boy is a creature of odd feelings.  i was, i really believe, in spite of my secret self-disgust, a little flattered to have the attention of these big fellows.  i remember particularly a moment of pleasure caused by the praise of crawshaw--you remember crawshaw major, the son of crawshaw the composer?--who said it was the best lie he had ever heard.  but at the same time there was a really painful undertow of shame at telling what i felt was indeed a sacred secret.  that beast fawcett made a joke about the girl in green--."wallace's voice sank with the keen memory of that shame.  "i pretended not to hear," he said.  "well, then carnaby suddenly called me a young liar and disputed with me when i said the thing was true.  i said i knew where to find the green door, could lead them all there in ten minutes.   carnaby became outrageously virtuous, and said i'd have to--and bear out my words or suffer.  did you ever have carnaby twist your arm?  then perhaps you`ll understand how it went with me.  i swore my story was true.  there was nobody in the school then to save a chap from carnaby though crawshaw put in a word or so.  carnaby had got his game.  i grew excited and red-eared, and a little frightened, i behaved altogether like a silly little chap, and the outcome of it all was that instead of starting alone for my enchanted garden, i led the way presently--cheeks flushed, ears hot, eyes smarting, and my soul one burning misery and shame--for a party of six mocking, curious and threatening school-fellows."we never found the white wall and the green door . . .""you mean?--""i mean i couldn't find it.  i would have found it if i could."and afterwards when i could go alone i couldn't find it.  i never found it. i seem now to have been always looking for it through my school-boy days, but i've never come upon it again.""did the fellows--make it disagreeable?""beastly . . . . .  carnaby held a council over me for wanton lying.  i remember how i sneaked home and upstairs to hide the marks of my blubbering.  but when i cried myself to sleep at last it wasn't for carnaby, but for the garden, for the beautiful afternoon i had hoped for, for the sweet friendly women and the waiting playfellows and the game i had hoped to learn again, that beautiful forgotten game . . ."i believed firmly that if i had not told-- . . .  i had bad times after that--crying at night and woolgathering by day.  for two terms i slackened and had bad reports.  do you remember?  of course you would!  it was you--your beating me in mathematics that brought me back to the grind again."3for a time my friend stared silently into the red heart of the fire.  then he said: "i never saw it again until i was seventeen."it leapt upon me for the third time--as i was driving to paddington on my way to oxford and a scholarship.  i had just one momentary glimpse.  i was leaning over the apron of my hansom smoking a cigarette, and no doubt thinking myself no end of a man of the world, and suddenly there was the door, the wall, the dear sense of unforgettable and still attainable things."we clattered by--i too taken by surprise to stop my cab until we were well past and round a corner.  then i had a queer moment, a double and divergent movement of my will: i tapped the little door in the roof of the cab, and brought my arm down to pull out my watch.  'yes, sir!' said the cabman, smartly.  'er-- well--it's nothing,' i cried.  'my mistake!  we haven't much time!  go on!' and he went on . . ."i got my scholarship.  and the night after i was told of that i sat over my fire in my little upper room, my study, in my father's house, with his praise--his rare praise--and his sound counsels ringing in my ears, and i smoked my favourite pipe--the formidable bulldog of adolescence--and thought of that door in the long white wall.  'if i had stopped,' i thought, 'i should have missed my scholarship, i should have missed oxford--muddled all the fine career before me!  i begin to see things better!' i fell musing deeply, but i did not doubt then this career of mine was a thing that merited sacrifice."those dear friends and that clear atmosphere seemed very sweet to me, very fine, but remote.  my grip was fixing now upon the world.  i saw another door opening--the door of my career."he stared again into the fire.  its red lights picked out a stubborn strength in his face for just one flickering moment, and then it vanished again."well", he said and sighed, "i have served that career.  i have done--much work, much hard work.  but i have dreamt of the enchanted garden a thousand dreams, and seen its door, or at least glimpsed its door, four times since then.  yes--four times.  for a while this world was so bright and interesting, seemed so full of meaning and opportunity that the half-effaced charm of the garden was by comparison gentle and remote.  who wants to pat panthers on the way to dinner with pretty women and distinguished men?  i came down to london from oxford, a man of bold promise that i have done something to redeem.  something--and yet there have been disappointments . . . ."twice i have been in love--i will not dwell on that--but once, as i went to someone who, i know, doubted whether i dared to come, i took a short cut at a venture through an unfrequented road near earl's court, and so happened on a white wall and a familiar green door.  'odd!' said i to myself, 'but i thought this place was on campden hill.  it's the place i never could find somehow--like counting stonehenge--the place of that queer day dream of mine.' and i went by it intent upon my purpose.  it had no appeal to me that afternoon."i had just a moment's impulse to try the door, three steps aside were needed at the most--though i was sure enough in my heart that it would open to me--and then i thought that doing so might delay me on the way to that appointment in which i thought my honour was involved.  afterwards i was sorry for my punctuality--i might at least have peeped in i thought, and waved a hand to those panthers, but i knew enough by this time not to seek again belatedly that which is not found by seeking.  yes, that time made me very sorry . . . ."years of hard work after that and never a sight of the door.  it's only recently it has come back to me.  with it there has come a sense as though some thin tarnish had spread itself over my world.  i began to think of it as a sorrowful and bitter thing that i should never see that door again.  perhaps i was suffering a little from overwork--perhaps it was what i've heard spoken of as the feeling of forty.  i don't know.  but certainly the keen brightness that makes effort easy has gone out of things recently, and that just at a time with all these new political developments --when i ought to be working.  odd, isn`t it?  but i do begin to find life toilsome, its rewards, as i come near them, cheap.  i began a little while ago to want the garden quite badly.  yes--and i've seen it three times.""the garden?""no--the door!  and i haven't gone in!"he leaned over the table to me, with an enormous sorrow in his voice as he spoke.  "thrice i have had my chance--thrice!  if ever that door offers itself to me again, i swore, i will go in out of this dust and heat, out of this dry glitter of vanity, out of these toilsome futilities.  i will go and never return.  this time i will stay . . . .  i swore it and when the time came--i didn't go."three times in one year have i passed that door and failed to enter.  three times in the last year."the first time was on the night of the snatch division on the tenants' redemption bill, on which the government was saved by a majority of three.  you remember?  no one on our side--perhaps very few on the opposite side--expected the end that night.  then the debate collapsed like eggshells.  i and hotchkiss were dining with his cousin at brentford, we were both unpaired, and we were called up by telephone, and set off at once in his cousin's motor.  we got in barely in time, and on the way we passed my wall and door--livid in the moonlight, blotched with hot yellow as the glare of our lamps lit it, but unmistakable.  'my god!' cried i.  'what?' said hotchkiss.  'nothing!' i answered, and the moment passed."'i've made a great sacrifice,' i told the whip as i got in. 'they all have,' he said, and hurried by."i do not see how i could have done otherwise then.  and the next occasion was as i rushed to my father's bedside to bid that stern old man farewell.  then, too, the claims of life were imperative.  but the third time was different; it happened a week ago.  it fills me with hot remorse to recall it.  i was with gurker and ralphs--it`s no secret now you know that i've had my talk with gurker.  we had been dining at frobisher's, and the talk had become intimate between us.  the question of my place in the reconstructed ministry lay always just over the boundary of the discussion.  yes --yes.  that's all settled.  it needn't be talked about yet, but there's no reason to keep a secret from you . . . .  yes--thanks! thanks!  but let me tell you my story."then, on that night things were very much in the air.  my position was a very delicate one.  i was keenly anxious to get some definite word from gurker, but was hampered by ralphs' presence.  i was using the best power of my brain to keep that light and careless talk not too obviously directed to the point that concerns me.  i had to.  ralphs' behaviour since has more than justified my caution . . . .  ralphs, i knew, would leave us beyond the kensington high street, and then i could surprise gurker by a sudden frankness.  one has sometimes to resort to these little devices. . . .  and then it was that in the margin of my field of vision i became aware once more of the white wall, the green door before us down the road."we passed it talking.  i passed it.  i can still see the shadow of gurker's marked profile, his opera hat tilted forward over his prominent nose, the many folds of his neck wrap going before my shadow and ralphs' as we sauntered past."i passed within twenty inches of the door.  'if i say good-night to them, and go in,' i asked myself, 'what will happen?' and i was all a-tingle for that word with gurker."i could not answer that question in the tangle of my other problems.  'they will think me mad,' i thought.  'and suppose i vanish now!--amazing disappearance of a prominent politician!' that weighed with me. a thousand inconceivably petty worldlinesses weighed with me in that crisis."then he turned on me with a sorrowful smile, and, speaking slowly; "here i am!" he said."here i am!" he repeated, "and my chance has gone from me.  three times in one year the door has been offered me--the door that goes into peace, into delight, into a beauty beyond dreaming, a kindness no man on earth can know.  and i have rejected it, redmond, and it has gone--""how do you know?""i know.  i know.  i am left now to work it out, to stick to the tasks that held me so strongly when my moments came.  you say, i have success--this vulgar, tawdry, irksome, envied thing.  i have it."  he had a walnut in his big hand.  "if that was my success," he said, and crushed it, and held it out for me to see."let me tell you something, redmond.  this loss is destroying me.  for two months, for ten weeks nearly now, i have done no work at all, except the most necessary and urgent duties.  my soul is full of inappeasable regrets.  at nights--when it is less likely i shall be recognised--i go out.  i wander.  yes.  i wonder what people would think of that if they knew.  a cabinet minister, the responsible head of that most vital of all departments, wandering alone--grieving--sometimes near audibly lamenting--for a door, for a garden!"4i can see now his rather pallid face, and the unfamiliar sombre fire that had come into his eyes.  i see him very vividly to-night.  i sit recalling his words, his tones, and last evening's westminster gazette still lies on my sofa, containing the notice of his death.  at lunch to-day the club was busy with him and the strange riddle of his fate.they found his body very early yesterday morning in a deep excavation near east kensington station.  it is one of two shafts that have been made in connection with an extension of the railway southward.  it is protected from the intrusion of the public by a hoarding upon the high road, in which a small doorway has been cut for the convenience of some of the workmen who live in that direction.  the doorway was left unfastened through a misunderstanding between two gangers, and through it he made his way . . . . .my mind is darkened with questions and riddles.it would seem he walked all the way from the house that night--he has frequently walked home during the past session--and so it is i figure his dark form coming along the late and empty streets, wrapped up, intent.  and then did the pale electric lights near the station cheat the rough planking into a semblance of white?  did that fatal unfastened door awaken some memory?was there, after all, ever any green door in the wall at all?i do not know.  i have told his story as he told it to me.  there are times when i believe that wallace was no more than the victim of the coincidence between a rare but not unprecedented type of hallucination and a careless trap, but that indeed is not my profoundest belief.  you may think me superstitious if you will, and foolish; but, indeed, i am more than half convinced that he had in truth, an abnormal gift, and a sense, something--i know not what--that in the guise of wall and door offered him an outlet, a secret and peculiar passage of escape into another and altogether more beautiful world.  at any rate, you will say, it betrayed him in the end.  but did it betray him?  there you touch the inmost mystery of these dreamers, these men of vision and the imagination.we see our world fair and common, the hoarding and the pit.  by our daylight standard he walked out of security into darkness, danger and death.  but did he see like that?chapter ithe time traveller  (for so it will be convenient to speak of him) was expounding a recondite matter to us. his grey eyes shone and twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and animated.  the fire burned brightly, and the soft radiance of the incandescent lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that flashed and passed in our glasses. our chairs, being his patents, embraced and caressed us rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams gracefully free of the trammels of precision. and he put it to us in this way, marking the points with a lean forefinger, as we sat and lazily admired his earnestness over this new paradox (as we thought it) and his fecundity."you must follow me carefully. i shall have to controvert one or two ideas that are almost universally accepted. the geometry, for instance, they taught you at school is founded on a misconception.""is not that rather a large thing to expect us to begin upon?" said filby, an argumentative person with red hair."i do not mean to ask you to accept anything without reasonable ground for it. you will soon admit as much as i need from you. you know of course that a mathematical line, a line of thickness nil, has no real existence. they taught you that? neither has a mathematical plane. these things are mere abstractions.""that is all right," said the psychologist."nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube have a real existence.""there i object," said filby. "of course a solid body may exist.  all real things-""so most people think. but wait a moment. can an instantaneous  cube exist?""don't follow you," said filby."can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real existence?"filby became pensive. "clearly," the time traveller proceeded, "any real body must have extension in four directions: it must have length, breadth, thickness, and duration. but through a natural infirmity of the flesh, which i will explain to you in a moment, we incline to overlook this fact. there are really four dimensions, three which we call the three planes of space, and a fourth, time. there is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that our consciousness moves intermittently in one direction along the latter from the beginning to the end of our lives.""that," said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to relight his cigar over the lamp; "that . . . very clear indeed.""now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively overlooked," continued the time traveller, with a slight accession of cheerfulness. "really this is what is meant by the fourth dimension, though some people who talk about the fourth dimension do not know they mean it. it is only another way of looking at time. there is no difference between time and any of the three dimensions of space except that our consciousness moves along it.  but some foolish people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea. you have all heard what they have to say about this fourth dimension?""i have not," said the provincial mayor."it is simply this. that space, as our mathematicians have it, is spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may call length, breadth, and thickness, and is always definable by reference to three planes, each at right angles to the others. but some philosophical people have been asking why three dimensions particularly why not another direction at right angles to the other three? and have even tried to construct a four-dimension geometry.  professor simon newcomb was expounding this to the new york mathematical society only a month or so ago.  you know how on a flat surface, which has only two dimensions, we can represent a figure of a three-dimensional solid, and similarly they think that by models of three dimensions they could represent one of four if they could master the perspective of the thing.  see?""i think so," murmured the provincial mayor; and, knitting his brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips moving as one who repeats mystic words. "yes, i think i see it now," he said after some time, brightening in a quite transitory manner."well, i do not mind telling you i have been at work upon this geometry of four dimensions for some time. some of my results are curious. for instance, here is a portrait of a man at eight years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at twenty-three, and so on. all these are evidently sections, as it were, three-dimensional representations of his four-dimensioned being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.""scientific people," proceeded the time traveller, after the pause required for the proper assimilation of this, "know very well that time is only a kind of space. here is a popular scientific diagram, a weather record. this line i trace with my finger shows the movement of the barometer. yesterday it was so high, yesterday night it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so gently upward to here. surely the mercury did not trace this line in any of the dimensions of space generally recognized? but certainly it traced such a line, and that line, therefore, we must conclude was along the time-dimension.""but," said the medical man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, "if time is really only a fourth dimension of space, why is it, and why has it always been, regarded as something different? and why cannot we move in time as we move about in the other dimensions of space?"the time traveller smiled. "are you sure we can move freely in space? right and left we can go, backward and forward freely enough, and men always have done so. i admit we move freely in two dimensions. but how about up and down?  gravitation limits us there.""not exactly," said the medical man. "there are balloons.""but before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical movement.""still they could move a little up and down," said the medical man."easier, far easier down than up.""and you cannot move at all in time, you cannot get away from the present moment.""my dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. that is just where the whole world has gone wrong.  we are always getting away from the present movement. our mental existences, which are immaterial and have no dimensions, are passing along the time-dimension with a uniform velocity from the cradle to the grave. just as we should travel down if we began our existence fifty miles above the earth's surface.""but the great difficulty is this," interrupted the psychologist. "you can move about in all directions of space, but you cannot move about in time.""that is the germ of my great discovery. but you are wrong to say that we cannot move about in time. for instance, if i am recalling an incident very vividly i go back to the instant of its occurrence: i become absent-minded, as you say. i jump back for a moment. of course we have no means of staying back for any length of time, any more than a savage or an animal has of staying six feet above the ground. but a civilized man is better off than the savage in this respect. he can go up against gravitation in a balloon, and why should he not hope that ultimately he may be able to stop or accelerate his drift along the time-dimension, or even turn about and travel the other way?""oh, this," began filby, "is all-""why not?" said the time traveller."it's against reason," said filby."what reason?" said the time traveller."you can show black is white by argument," said filby, "but you will never convince me.""possibly not," said the time traveller. "but now you begin to see the object of my investigations into the geometry of four dimensions. long ago i had a vague inkling of a machine-""to travel through time!" exclaimed the very young man."that shall travel indifferently in any direction of space and time, as the driver determines."filby contented himself with laughter."but i have experimental verification," said the time traveller."it would be remarkably convenient for the historian," the psychologist suggested.  "one might travel back and verify the accepted account of the battle of hastings, for instance!""don't you think you would attract attention?" said the medical man.  "our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.""one might get one's greek from the very lips of homer and plato," the very young man thought."in which case they would certainly plough you for the littlego. the german scholars have improved greek so much."then there is the future," said the very young man. "just think!  one might invest all one's money, leave it to accumulate at interest, and hurry on ahead!""to discover a society," said i, "erected on a strictly communistic basis.""of all the wild extravagant theories!" began the psychologist."yes, so it seemed to me, and so i never talked of it until-""experimental verification!" cried i.  "you are going to verify that!""the experiment!" cried filby, who was getting brain-weary."let's see your experiment anyhow," said the psychologist, "though it's all humbug, you know."the time traveller smiled round at us. then, still smiling faintly, and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked slowly out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down the long passage to his laboratory.the psychologist looked at us.  "i wonder what he's got?""some sleight-of-hand trick or other," said the medical man, and filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen at burslem, but before he had finished his preface the time traveller came back, and filby's anecdote collapsed.the thing the time traveller held in his hand was a glittering metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very delicately made. there was ivory in it, and some transparent crystalline substance. and now i must be explicit, for this that follows, unless his explanation is to be accepted, is an absolutely unaccountable thing. he took one of the small octagonal tables that were scattered about the room, and set it in front of the fire, with two legs on the hearth rug. on this table he placed the mechanism. then he drew up a chair, and sat down. the only other object on the table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell upon the model. there were also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in brass candlesticks upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that the room was brilliantly illuminated. i sat in a low arm-chair nearest the fire, and i drew this forward so as to be almost between the time traveller and the fireplace. filby sat behind him, looking over his shoulder. the medical man and the provincial mayor watched him in profile from the right, the psychologist from the left. the very young man stood behind the psychologist. we were all on the alert. it appears incredible to me that any kind of trick, however subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could have been played upon us under these conditions.the time traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism. "well?" said the psychologist."this little affair," said the time traveller, resting his elbows upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus, "is only a model. it is my plan for a machine to travel through time. you will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar, as though it was in some way unreal." he pointed to the part with his finger. "also, here is one little white lever, and here is another."the medical man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing. "it's beautifully made," he said."it took two years to make," retorted the time traveller. then, when we had all imitated the action of the medical man, he said: "now i want you clearly to understand that this lever, being pressed over, sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses the motion. this saddle represents the seat of a time traveller. presently i am going to press the lever, and off the machine will go. it will vanish, pass into future time, and disappear. have a good look at the thing. look at the table too, and satisfy yourselves there is no trickery. i don't want to waste this model, and then be told i'm a quack."there was a minute's pause perhaps. the psychologist seemed about to speak to me, but changed his mind. then the time traveller put forth his finger towards the lever. "no," he said suddenly. "lend me your hand." and turning to the psychologist, he took that individual's hand in his own and told him to put out his forefinger. so that it was the psychologist himself who sent forth the model time machine on its interminable voyage. we all saw the lever turn. i am absolutely certain there was no trickery. there was a breath of wind, and the lamp flame jumped. one of the candles on the mantel was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of faintly glittering brass and ivory; and it was gone, vanished!  save for the lamp the table was bare.everyone was silent for a minute. then filby said he was damned.the psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked under the table. at that the time traveller laughed cheerfully. "well?" he said, with a reminiscence of the psychologist. then, getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his back to us began to fill his pipe.we stared at each other. "look here," said the medical man, "are you in earnest about this? do you seriously believe that that machine has travelled into time?""certainly," said the time traveller, stooping to light a spill at the fire. then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the psychologist's face. (the psychologist, to show that he was not unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.) "what is more, i have a big machine nearly finished in there" he indicated the laboratory "and when that is put together i mean to have a journey on my own account.""you mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?" said filby."into the future or the past i don't, for certain, know which."after an interval the psychologist had an inspiration. "it must have gone into the past if it has gone anywhere," he said."why?" said the time traveller."because i presume that it has not moved in space, and if it travelled into the future it would still be here all this time, since it must have travelled through this time.""but," i said, "if it travelled into the past it would have been visible when we came first into this room; and last thursday when we were here; and the thursday before that; and so forth!""serious objections," remarked the provincial mayor, with an air of impartiality, turning towards the time traveller."not a bit," said the time traveller, and, to the psychologist: "you think. you can explain that. it's presentation below the threshold, you know, diluted presentation.""of course," said the psychologist, and reassured us. "that's a simple point of psychology. i should have thought of it. it's plain enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. we cannot see it, nor can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air.  if it is travelling through time fifty times or a hundred times faster than we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second, the impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling in time. that's plain enough." he passed his hand through the space in which the machine had been. "you see?" he said, laughing.we sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. then the time traveller asked us what we thought of it all."it sounds plausible enough to-night," said the medical man; "but wait until to-morrow. wait for the common sense of the morning.""would you like to see the time machine itself?" asked the time traveller. and therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. i remember vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette, the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but incredulous, and how there in the laboratory we beheld a larger edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before our eyes.  parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. the thing was generally complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the bench beside some sheets of drawings, and i took one up for a better look at it. quartz it seemed to be."look here," said the medical man, "are you perfectly serious?  or is this a trick like that ghost you showed us last christmas?""upon that machine," said the time traveller, holding the lamp aloft, "i intend to explore time. is that plain? i was never more serious in my life."none of us quite knew how to take it.i caught filby's eye over the shoulder of the medical man, and he winked at me solemnly.chapter iii think that at that time none of us quite believed in the time machine. the fact is, the time traveller was one of those men who are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all round him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in ambush, behind his lucid frankness. had filby shown the model and explained the matter in the time traveller's words, we should have shown him far less scepticism. for we should have perceived his motives; a pork-butcher could understand filby. but the time traveller had more than a touch of whim among his elements, and we distrusted him. things that would have made the frame of a less clever man seemed tricks in his hands. it is a mistake to do things too easily. the serious people who took him seriously never felt quite sure of his deportment: they were somehow aware that trusting their reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a nursery with eggshell china. so i don't think any of us said very much about time travelling in the interval between that thursday and the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of our minds: its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness, the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it suggested. for my own part, i was particularly preoccupied with the trick of the model. that i remember discussing with the medical man, whom i met on friday at the linnan. he said he had seen a similar thing at tybingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing out of the candle.  but how the trick was done he could not explain.the next thursday i went again to richmond, i suppose i was one of the time traveller's most constant guests and, arriving late, found four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room. the medical man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand and his watch in the other. i looked round for the time traveller, and "it's half-past seven now," said the medical man. "i suppose we'd better have dinner?""where's _____?" said i, naming our host."you've just come? it's rather odd. he's unavoidably detained.  he asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at seven if he's not back. says he'll explain when he comes.""it seems a pity to let the dinner spoil," said the editor of a well-known daily paper; and thereupon the doctor rang the bell.the psychologist was the only person besides the doctor and myself who had attended the previous dinner. the other men were blank, the editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another, a quiet, shy man with a beard whom i didn't know, and who, as far as my observation went, never opened his mouth all the evening. there was some speculation at the dinner-table about the time traveller's absence, and i suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit. the editor wanted that explained to him, and the psychologist volunteered a wooden account of the "ingenious paradox and trick" we had witnessed that day week. he was in the midst of his exposition when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. i was facing the door, and saw it first. "hallo!" i said. "at last!" and the door opened wider, and the time traveller stood before us. i gave a cry of surprise. "good heavens! man, what's the matter?" cried the medical man, who saw him next. and the whole tableful turned towards the door.he was in an amazing plight. his coat was dusty and dirty, and smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair disordered, and as it seemed to me greyer either with dust and dirt or because its colour had actually faded. his face was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown cut on it a cut half healed; his expression was haggard and drawn, as by intense suffering. for a moment he hesitated in the doorway, as if he had been dazzled by the light. then he came into the room. he walked with just such a limp as i have seen in footsore tramps.  we stared at him in silence, expecting him to speak.he said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a motion towards the wine. the editor filled a glass of champagne, and pushed it towards him. he drained it, and it seemed to do him good: for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile flickered across his face. "what on earth have you been up to, man?" said the doctor. the time traveller did not seem to hear. "don't let me disturb you," he said, with a certain faltering articulation. "i'm all right." he stopped, held out his glass for more, and took it off at a draught. "that's good," he said. his eyes grew brighter, and a faint colour came into his cheeks. his glance flickered over our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm and comfortable room. then he spoke again, still as it were feeling his way among his words. "i'm going to wash and dress, and then i'll come down and explain things. . . . save me some of that mutton. i'm starving for a bit of meat."he looked across at the editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he was all right. the editor began a question. "tell you presently," said the time traveller. "i'm funny!  be all right in a minute."he put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. again i remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of his footfall, and standing up in my place, i saw his feet as he went out. he had nothing on them but a pair of tattered blood-stained socks. then the door closed upon him. i had half a mind to follow, till i remembered how he detested any fuss about himself. for a minute, perhaps, my mind was wool gathering. then, "remarkable behaviour of an eminent scientist," i heard the editor say, thinking (after his wont) in headlines. and this brought my attention back to the bright dinner-table."what's the game?" said the journalist. "has he been doing the amateur cadger? i don't follow." i met the eye of the psychologist, and read my own interpretation in his face. i thought of the time traveller limping painfully upstairs. i don't think any one else had noticed his lameness.the first to recover completely from this surprise was the medical man, who rang the bell the time traveller hated to have servants waiting at dinner for a hot plate. at that the editor turned to his knife and fork with a grunt, and the silent man followed suit. the dinner was resumed. conversation was exclamatory for a little while, with gaps of wonderment; and then the editor got fervent in his curiosity. "does our friend eke out his modest income with a crossing? or has he his nebuchadnezzar phases?" he inquired. "i feel assured it's this business of the time machine," i said, and took up the psychologist's account of our previous meeting. the new guests were frankly incredulous. the editor raised objections.  "what was this time travelling?  a man couldn't cover himself with dust by rolling in a paradox, could he?" and then, as the idea came home to him, he resorted to caricature. hadn't they any clothes-brushes in the future? the journalist too, would not believe at any price, and joined the editor in the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole thing. they were both the new kind of journalist very joyous, irreverent young men. "our special correspondent in the day after to-morrow reports," the journalist was saying, or rather shouting, when the time traveller came back. he was dressed in ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained of the change that had startled me."i say," said the editor hilariously, "these chaps here say you have been travelling into the middle of next week! tell us all about little rosebery, will you? what will you take for the lot?"the time traveller came to the place reserved for him without a word. he smiled quietly, in his old way. "where's my mutton?" he said. "what a treat it is to stick a fork into meat again!""story!" cried the editor."story be damned!" said the time traveller. "i want something to eat. i won't say a word until i get some peptone into my arteries. thanks. and the salt.""one word," said i. "have you been time travelling?""yes," said the time traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his head."i'd give a shilling a line for a verbatim note," said the editor. the time traveller pushed his glass towards the silent man and rang it with his finger nail; at which the silent man, who had been staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine. the rest of the dinner was uncomfortable. for my own part, sudden questions kept on rising to my lips, and i dare say it was the same with the others. the journalist tried to relieve the tension by telling anecdotes of hettie potter.  the time traveller devoted his attention to his dinner, and displayed the appetite of a tramp. the medical man smoked a cigarette, and watched the time traveller through his eyelashes.  the silent man seemed even more clumsy than usual, and drank champagne with regularity and determination out of sheer nervousness. at last the time traveller pushed his plate away, and looked round us. "i suppose i must apologize," he said. "i was simply starving. i've had a most amazing time." he reached out his hand for a cigar, and cut the end. "but come into the smoking-room. it's too long a story to tell over greasy plates." and ringing the bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room."you have told blank, and dash, and chose about the machine?" he said to me, leaning back in his easy chair and naming the three new guests."but the thing's a mere paradox," said the editor."i can't argue to-night. i don't mind telling you the story, but i can't argue. i will," he went on, "tell you the story of what has happened to me, if you like, but you must refrain from interruptions. i want to tell it. badly. most of it will sound like lying. so be it! it's true every word of it, all the same.  i was in my laboratory at four o'clock, and since then . . . i've lived eight days . . . such days as no human being ever lived before! i'm nearly worn out, but i shan't sleep till i've told this thing over to you. then i shall go to bed. but no interruptions! is it agreed?""agreed," said the editor, and the rest of us echoed "agreed." and with that the time traveller began his story as i have set it forth. he sat back in his chair at first, and spoke like a weary man. afterwards he got more animated. in writing it down i feel with only too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink and, above all, my own inadequacy to express its quality. you read, i will suppose, attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker's white, sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear the intonation of his voice. you cannot know how his expression followed the turns of his story! most of us hearers were in shadow, for the candles in the smoking-room had not been lighted, and only the face of the journalist and the legs of the silent man from the knees downward were illuminated.  at first we glanced now and again at each other. after a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the time traveller's face.chapter iii"i told some of you last thursday of the principles of the time machine, and showed you the actual thing itself, incomplete in the workshop. there it is now, a little travel-worn, truly; and one of the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass rail bent; but the rest of it's sound enough. i expected to finish it on friday, but on friday, when the putting together was nearly done, i found that one of the nickel bars was exactly one inch too short, and this i had to get remade; so that the thing was not complete until this morning. it was at ten o'clock to-day that the first of all time machines began its career. i gave it a last tap, tried all the screws again, put one more drop of oil on the quartz rod, and sat myself in the saddle. i suppose a suicide who holds a pistol to his skull feels much the same wonder at what will come next as i felt then. i took the starting lever in one hand and the stopping one in the other, pressed the first, and almost immediately the second. i seemed to reel; i felt a nightmare sensation of falling; and, looking round, i saw the laboratory exactly as before. had anything happened? for a moment i suspected that my intellect had tricked me. then i noted the clock. a moment before, as it seemed, it had stood at a minute or so past ten; now it was nearly half-past three! "i drew a breath, set my teeth, gripped the starting lever with both hands, and went off with a thud. the laboratory got hazy and went dark. mrs. watchett came in and walked, apparently without seeing me, towards the garden door. i suppose it took her a minute or so to traverse the place, but to me she seemed to shoot across the room like a rocket. i pressed the lever over to its extreme position. the night came like the turning out of a lamp, and in another moment came to-morrow. the laboratory grew faint and hazy, then fainter and ever fainter. to-morrow night came black, then day again, night again, day again, faster and faster still. an eddying murmur filled my ears, and a strange, dumb confusedness descended on my mind."i am afraid i cannot convey the peculiar sensations of time travelling. they are excessively unpleasant. there is a feeling exactly like that one has upon a switchback of a helpless headlong motion! i felt the same horrible anticipation, too, of an imminent smash. as i put on pace, night followed day like the flapping of a black wing.  the dim suggestion of the laboratory seemed presently to fall away from me, and i saw the sun hopping swiftly across the sky, leaping it every minute, and every minute marking a day. i supposed the laboratory had been destroyed and i had come into the open air. i had a dim impression of scaffolding, but i was already going too fast to be conscious of any moving things. the slowest snail that ever crawled dashed by too fast for me. the twinkling succession of darkness and light was excessively painful to the eye. then, in the intermittent darknesses, i saw the moon spinning swiftly through her quarters from new to full, and had a faint glimpse of the circling stars. presently, as i went on, still gaining velocity, the palpitation of night and day merged into one continuous greyness; the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a splendid luminous color like that of early twilight; the jerking sun became a streak of fire, a brilliant arch, in space; the moon a fainter fluctuating band; and i could see nothing of the stars, save now and then a brighter circle flickering in the blue."the landscape was misty and vague. i was still on the hillside upon which this house now stands, and the shoulder rose above me grey and dim. i saw trees growing and changing like puffs of vapour, now brown, now green; they grew, spread, shivered, and passed away. i saw huge buildings rise up faint and fair, and pass like dreams. the whole surface of the earth seemed changed   melting and flowing under my eyes. the little hands upon the dials that registered my speed raced round faster and faster.  presently i noted that the sun belt swayed up and down, from solstice to solstice, in a minute or less, and that consequently my pace was over a year a minute; and minute by minute the white snow flashed across the world, and vanished, and was followed by the bright, brief green of spring."the unpleasant sensations of the start were less poignant now.  they merged at last into a kind of hysterical exhilaration. i remarked indeed a clumsy swaying of the machine, for which i was unable to account. but my mind was too confused to attend to it, so with a kind of madness growing upon me, i flung myself into futurity. at first i scarce thought of stopping, scarce thought of anything but these new sensations. but presently a fresh series of impressions grew up in my mind a certain curiosity and therewith a certain dread until at last they took complete possession of me.  what strange developments of humanity, what wonderful advances upon our rudimentary civilization, i thought, might not appear when i came to look nearly into the dim elusive world that raced and fluctuated before my eyes! i saw great and splendid architecture rising about me, more massive than any buildings of our own time, and yet, as it seemed, built of glimmer and mist. i saw a richer green flow up the hillside, and remain there, without any wintry intermission. even through the veil of my confusion the earth seemed very fair. and so my mind came round to the business of stopping."the peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some substance in the space which i, or the machine, occupied. so long as i travelled at a high velocity through time, this scarcely mattered; i was, so to speak, attenuated was slipping like a vapour through the interstices of intervening substances!  but to come to a stop involved the jamming of myself, molecule by molecule, into whatever lay in my way; meant bringing my atoms into such intimate contact with those of the obstacle that a profound chemical reaction possibly a far-reaching explosion would result, and blow myself and my apparatus out of all possible dimensions into the unknown. this possibility had occurred to me again and again while i was making the machine; but then i had cheerfully accepted it as an unavoidable risk     one of the risks a man has got to take! now the risk was inevitable, i no longer saw it in the same cheerful light. the fact is that insensibly, the absolute strangeness of everything, the sickly jarring and swaying of the machine, above all, the feeling of prolonged falling, had absolutely upset my nerve. i told myself that i could never stop, and with a gust of petulance i resolved to stop forthwith. like an impatient fool, i lugged over the lever, and incontinently the thing went reeling over, and i was flung headlong through the air."there was the sound of a clap of thunder in my ears. i may have been stunned for a moment. a pitiless hail was hissing round me, and i was sitting on soft turf in front of the overset machine.  everything still seemed grey, but presently i remarked that the confusion in my ears was gone. i looked round me. i was on what seemed to be a little lawn in a garden, surrounded by rhododendron bushes, and i noticed that their mauve and purple blossoms were dropping in a shower under the beating of the hailstones. the rebounding, dancing hail hung in a cloud over the machine, and drove along the ground like smoke. in a moment i was wet to the skin. 'fine hospitality,' said i, 'to a man who  has travelled innumerable years to see you.'"presently i thought what a fool i was to get wet. i stood up and looked round me. a colossal figure, carved apparently in some white stone, loomed indistinctly beyond the rhododendrons through the hazy downpour. but all else of the world was invisible."my sensations would be hard to describe. as the columns of hail grew thinner, i saw the white figure more distinctly. it was very large, for a silver birch-tree touched its shoulder. it was of white marble, in shape something like a winged sphinx, but the wings, instead of being carried vertically at the sides, were spread so that it seemed to hover. the pedestal, it appeared to me, was of bronze, and was thick with verdigris. it chanced that the face was towards me; the sightless eyes seemed to watch me; there was the faint shadow of a smile on the lips. it was greatly weather-worn, and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. i stood looking at it for a little space half a minute, perhaps, or half an hour. it seemed to advance and to recede as the hail drove before it denser or thinner. at last i tore my eyes from it for a moment and saw that the hail curtain had worn threadbare, and that the sky was lightening with the promise of the sun."i looked up again at the crouching white shape, and the full temerity of my voyage came suddenly upon me. what might appear when that hazy curtain was altogether withdrawn? what might not have happened to men? what if cruelty had grown into a common passion? what if in this interval the race had lost its manliness and had developed into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly powerful? i might seem some old-world savage animal, only the more dreadful and disgusting for our common likeness a foul creature to be incontinently slain."already i saw other vast shapes--huge buildings with intricate parapets and tall columns, with a wooded hill-side dimly creeping in upon me through the lessening storm. i was seized with a panic fear. i turned frantically to the time machine, and strove hard to readjust it. as i did so the shafts of the sun smote through the thunderstorm. the grey downpour was swept aside and vanished like the trailing garments of a ghost. above me, in the intense blue of the summer sky, some faint brown shreds of cloud whirled into nothingness. the great buildings about me stood out clear and distinct, shining with the wet of the thunderstorm, and picked out in white by the unmelted hailstones piled along their courses. i felt naked in a strange world. i felt as perhaps a bird may feel in the clear air, knowing the hawk wings above and will swoop. my fear grew to frenzy. i took a breathing space, set my teeth, and again grappled fiercely, wrist and knee, with the machine. it gave under my desperate onset and turned over.  it struck my chin violently. one hand on the saddle, the other on the lever, i stood panting heavily in attitude to mount again."but with this recovery of a prompt retreat my courage recovered.  i looked more curiously and less fearfully at this world of the remote future. in a circular opening, high up in the wall of the nearer house, i saw a group of figures clad in rich soft robes.  they had seen me, and their faces were directed towards me."then i heard voices approaching me. coming through the bushes by the white sphinx were the heads and shoulders of men running.  one of these emerged in a pathway leading straight to the little lawn upon which i stood with my machine. he was a slight creature--perhaps four feet high clad in a purple tunic, girdled at the waist with a leather belt. sandals or buskins i could not clearly distinguish which--were on his feet; his legs were bare to the knees, and his head was bare. noticing that, i noticed for the first time how warm the air was."he struck me as being a very beautiful and graceful creature, but indescribably frail. his flushed face reminded me of the more beautiful kind of consumptive that hectic beauty of which we used to hear so much. at the sight of him i suddenly regained confidence. i took my hands from the machine.chapter iv"in another moment we were standing face to face, i and this fragile thing out of futurity. he came straight up to me and laughed into my eyes. the absence from his bearing of any sign of fear struck me at once. then he turned to the two others who were following him and spoke to them in a strange and very sweet and liquid tongue."there were others coming, and presently a little group of perhaps eight or ten of these exquisite creatures were about me. one of them addressed me. it came into my head, oddly enough, that my voice was too harsh and deep for them. so i shook my head, and, pointing to my ears, shook it again. he came a step forward, hesitated, and then touched my hand. then i felt other soft little tentacles upon my back and shoulders. they wanted to make sure i was real. there was nothing in this at all alarming.  indeed, there was something in these pretty little people that inspired confidence, a graceful gentleness, a certain childlike ease.  and besides, they looked so frail that i could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them about like nine-pins. but i made a sudden motion to warn them when i saw their little pink hands feeling at the time machine.  happily then, when it was not too late, i thought of a danger i had hitherto forgotten, and reaching over the bars of the machine i unscrewed the little levers that would set it in motion, and put these in my pocket. then i turned again to see what i could do in the way of communication."and then, looking more nearly into their features, i saw some further peculiarities in their dresden china type of prettiness.  their hair, which was uniformly curly, came to a sharp end at the neck and cheek; there was not the faintest suggestion of it on the face, and their ears were singularly minute. the mouths were small, with bright red, rather thin lips, and the little chins ran to a point.  the eyes were large and mild; and this may seem egotism on my part i fancied even that there was a certain lack of the interest i might have expected in them."as they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood round me smiling and speaking in soft cooing notes to each other, i began the conversation. i pointed to the time machine and to myself. then hesitating for a moment how to express time, i pointed to the sun. at once a quaintly pretty little figure in chequered purple and white followed my gesture, and then astonished me by imitating the sound of thunder."for a moment i was staggered, though the import of his gesture was plain enough. the question had come into my mind abruptly: were these creatures fools? you may hardly understand how it took me. you see i had always anticipated that the people of the year eight hundred and two thousand odd would be incredibly in front of us in knowledge, art, everything. then one of them suddenly asked me a question that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of our five-year-old children asked me, in fact, if i had come from the sun in a thunderstorm! it let loose the judgment i had suspended upon their clothes, their frail light limbs, and fragile features. a flow of disappointment rushed across my mind. for a moment i felt that i had built the time machine in vain."i nodded, pointed to the sun, and gave them such a vivid rendering of a thunderclap as startled them. they all withdrew a pace or so and bowed. then came one laughing towards me, carrying a chain of beautiful flowers altogether new to me, and put it about my neck. the idea was received with melodious applause; and presently they were all running to and fro for flowers, and laughingly flinging them upon me until i was almost smothered with blossom. you who have never seen the like can scarcely imagine what delicate and wonderful flowers countless years of culture had created. then someone suggested that their plaything should be exhibited in the nearest building, and so i was led past the sphinx of white marble, which had seemed to watch me all the while with a smile at my astonishment, towards a vast grey edifice of fretted stone. as i went with them the memory of my confident anticipations of a profoundly grave and intellectual posterity came, with irresistible merriment, to my mind."the building had a huge entry, and was altogether of colossal dimensions. i was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of little people, and with the big open portals that yawned before me shadowy and mysterious. my general impression of the world i saw over their heads was a tangled waste of beautiful bushes and flowers, a long neglected and yet weedless garden. i saw a number of tall spikes of strange white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps across the spread of the waxen petals.  they grew scattered, as if wild, among the variegated shrubs, but, as i say, i did not examine them closely at this time.  the time machine was left deserted on the turf among the rhododendrons."the arch of the doorway was richly carved, but naturally i did not observe the carving very narrowly, though i fancied i saw suggestions of old phoenician decorations as i passed through, and it struck me that they were very badly broken and weather- worn. several more brightly clad people met me in the doorway, and so we entered, i, dressed in dingy nineteenth-century garments, looking grotesque enough, garlanded with flowers, and surrounded by an eddying mass of bright, soft-colored robes and shining white limbs, in a melodious whirl of laughter and laughing speech."the big doorway opened into a proportionately great hall hung with brown. the roof was in shadow, and the windows, partially glazed with coloured glass and partially unglazed, admitted a tempered light. the floor was made up of huge blocks of some very hard white metal, not plates nor slabs, blocks, and it was so much worn, as i judged by the going to and fro of past generations, as to be deeply channelled along the more frequented ways. transverse to the length were innumerable tables made of slabs of polished stone, raised perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were heaps of fruits. some i recognized as a kind of hypertrophied raspberry and orange, but for the most part they were strange."between the tables was scattered a great number of cushions. upon these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do likewise. with a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the fruit with their hands, flinging peel and stalks, and so forth, into the round openings in the sides of the tables. i was not loath to follow their example, for i felt thirsty and hungry. as i did so i surveyed the hall at my leisure."and perhaps the thing that struck me most was its dilapidated look. the stained-glass windows, which displayed only a geometrical pattern, were broken in many places, and the curtains that hung across the lower end were thick with dust. and it caught my eye that the corner of the marble table near me was fractured. nevertheless, the general effect was extremely rich and picturesque. there were, perhaps, a couple of hundred people dining in the hall, and most of them, seated as near to me as they could come, were watching me with interest, their little eyes shining over the fruit they were eating. all were clad in the same soft and yet strong, silky material."fruit, by the by, was all their diet. these people of the remote future were strict vegetarians, and while i was with them, in spite of some carnal cravings, i had to be frugivorous also. indeed, i found afterwards that horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, had followed the ichthyosaurus into extinction. but the fruits were very delightful; one, in particular, that seemed to be in season all the time i was there--a floury thing in a three-sided husk was especially good, and i made it my staple.  at first i was puzzled by all these strange fruits, and by the strange flowers i saw, but later i began to perceive their import."however, i am telling you of my fruit dinner in the distant future now. so soon as my appetite was a little checked, i determined to make a resolute attempt to learn the speech of these new men of mine. clearly that was the next thing to do. the fruits seemed a convenient thing to begin upon, and holding one of these up i began a series of interrogative sounds and gestures. i had some considerable difficulty in conveying my meaning. at first my efforts met with a stare of surprise or inextinguishable laughter, but presently a fair-haired little creature seemed to grasp my intention and repeated a name. they had to chatter and explain the business at great length to each other, and my first attempts to make the exquisite little sounds of their language caused an immense amount of amusement. however, i felt like a schoolmaster amidst children, and persisted, and presently i had a score of noun substantives at least at my command; and then i got to demonstrative pronouns, and even the verb "to eat." but it was slow work, and the little people soon tired and wanted to get away from my interrogations, so i determined, rather of necessity, to let them give their lessons in little doses when they felt inclined. and very little doses i found they were before long, for i never met people more indolent or more easily fatigued."a queer thing i soon discovered about my little hosts, and that was their lack of interest. they would come to me with eager cries of astonishment, like children, but like children they would soon stop examining me and wander away after some other toy. the dinner and my conversational beginnings ended, i noted for the first time that almost all those who had surrounded me at first were gone. it is odd, too, how speedily i came to disregard these little people. i went out through the portal into the sunlit world again as soon as my hunger was satisfied. i was continually meeting more of these men of the future, who would follow me a little distance, chatter and laugh about me, and, having smiled and gesticulated in a friendly way, leave me again to my own devices."the calm of evening was upon the world as i emerged from the great hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow of the setting sun. at first things were very confusing. everything was so entirely different from the world i had known even the flowers. the big building i had left was situated on the slope of a broad river valley, but the thames had shifted perhaps a mile from its present position. i resolved to mount to the summit of a crest perhaps a mile and a half away, from which i could get a wider view of this our planet in the year eight hundred and two thousand seven hundred and one a.d. for that, i should explain, was the date the little dials of my machine recorded."as i walked i was watching for every impression that could possibly help to explain the condition of ruinous splendour in which i found the world for ruinous it was. a little way up the hill, for instance, was a great heap of granite, bound together by masses of aluminium, a vast labyrinth of precipitous walls and crumpled heaps, amidst which were thick heaps of very beautiful pagoda-like plants, nettles possibly--but wonderfully tinted with brown about the leaves, and incapable of stinging. it was evidently the derelict remains of some vast structure, to what end built i could not determine. it was here that i was destined, at a later date, to have a very strange experience    the first intimation of a still stranger discovery but of that i will speak in its proper place."looking round with a sudden thought, from a terrace on which i rested for a while, i realized that there were no small houses to be seen. apparently the single house, and possibly even the household, had vanished. here and there among the greenery were palace-like buildings, but the house and the cottage, which form such characteristic features of our own english landscape, had disappeared."'communism,' said i to myself."and on the heels of that came another thought. i looked at the half-dozen little figures that were following me. then, in a flash, i perceived that all had the same form of costume, the same soft hairless visage, and the same girlish rotundity of limb. it may seem strange, perhaps, that i had not noticed this before. but everything was so strange. now, i saw the fact plainly enough. in costume, and in all the differences of texture and bearing that now mark off the sexes from each other, these people of the future were alike. and the children seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their parents. i judged, then, that the children of that time were extremely precocious, physically at least, and i found afterwards abundant verification of my opinion."seeing the ease and security in which these people were living, i felt that this close resemblance of the sexes was after all what one would expect; for the strength of a man and the softness of a woman, the institution of the family, and the differentiation of occupations are mere militant necessities of an age of physical force; where population is balanced and abundant, much child-bearing becomes an evil rather than a blessing to the state; where violence comes but rarely and offspring are secure, there is less necessity, indeed there is no necessity, for an efficient family, and the specialization of the sexes with reference to their children's needs disappears. we see some beginnings of this even in our own time, and in this future age it was complete. this, i must remind you, was my speculation at the time. later, i was to appreciate how far it fell short of the reality."while i was musing upon these things, my attention was attracted by a pretty little structure, like a well under a cupola. i thought in a transitory way of the oddness of wells still existing, and then resumed the thread of my speculations. there were no large buildings towards the top of the hill, and as my walking powers were evidently miraculous, i was presently left alone for the first time. with a strange sense of freedom and adventure i pushed on up to the crest."there i found a seat of some yellow metal that i did not recognize, corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust and half smothered in soft moss, the arm-rests cast and filed into the resemblance of griffins' heads. i sat down on it, and i surveyed the broad view of our old world under the sunset of that long day. it was as sweet and fair a view as i have ever seen. the sun had already gone below the horizon and the west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal bars of purple and crimson. below was the valley of the thames, in which the river lay like a band of burnished steel. i have already spoken of the great palaces dotted about among the variegated greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied. here and there rose a white or silvery figure in the waste garden of the earth, here and there came the sharp vertical line of some cupola or obelisk. there were no hedges, no signs of proprietary rights, no evidences of agriculture; the whole earth had become a garden."so watching, i began to put my interpretation upon the things i had seen, and as it shaped itself to me that evening, my interpretation was something in this way. (afterwards i found i had got only a half-truth or only a glimpse of one facet of  the truth.)"it seemed to me that i had happened upon humanity upon the wane.  the ruddy sunset set me thinking of the sunset of mankind. for the first time i began to realize an odd consequence of the social effort in which we are at present engaged. and yet, come to think, it is a logical consequence enough. strength is the outcome of need; security sets a premium on feebleness. the work of ameliorating the conditions of life, the true civilizing process that makes life more and more secure had gone steadily on to a climax. one triumph of a united humanity over nature had followed another. things that are now mere dreams had become projects deliberately put in hand and carried forward. and the  harvest was what i saw!"after all, the sanitation and the agriculture of to-day are still in the rudimentary stage. the science of our time has attacked but a little department of the field of human disease, but even so, it spreads its operations very steadily and persistently. our agriculture and horticulture destroy a weed just here and there and cultivate perhaps a score or so of wholesome plants, leaving the greater number to fight out a balance as they can. we improve our favourite plants and animals, and how few they are, gradually by selective breeding; now a new and better peach, now a seedless grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more convenient breed of cattle. we improve them gradually, because our ideals are vague and tentative, and our knowledge is very limited; because nature, too, is shy and slow in our clumsy hands. some day all this will be better organized, and still better. that is the drift of the current in spite of the eddies. the whole world will be intelligent, educated, and co-operating; things will move faster and faster towards the subjugation of nature. in the end, wisely and carefully we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable to suit our human needs."this adjustment, i say, must have been done, and done well; done indeed for all time, in the space of time across which my machine had leaped. the air was free from gnats, the earth from weeds or fungi; everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers; brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. the ideal of preventive medicine was attained. diseases had been stamped out.  i saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay.  and i shall have to tell you later that even the processes of putrefaction and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes."social triumphs, too, had been effected. i saw mankind housed in splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, and as yet i had found them engaged in no toil. there were no signs of struggle, neither social nor economical struggle. the shop, the advertisement, traffic, all that commerce which constitutes the body of our world, was gone. it was natural on that golden evening that i should jump at the idea of a social paradise. the difficulty of increasing population had been met, i guessed, and population had ceased to increase."but with this change in condition comes inevitably adaptations to the change. what, unless biological science is a mass of errors, is the cause of human intelligence and vigour? hardship and freedom: conditions under which the active, strong, and subtle survive and the weaker go to the wall; conditions that put a premium upon the loyal alliance of capable men, upon self-restraint, patience, and decision.  and the institution of the family, and the emotions that arise therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring, parental self-devotion, all found their justification and support in the imminent dangers of the young. now, where are these imminent dangers?  there is a sentiment arising, and it will grow, against connubial jealousy, against fierce maternity, against passion of all sorts; unnecessary things now, and things that make us uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords in a refined and pleasant life."i thought of the physical slightness of the people, their lack of intelligence, and those big abundant ruins, and it strengthened my belief in a perfect conquest of nature. for after the battle comes quiet. humanity had been strong, energetic, and intelligent, and had used all its abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which it lived. and now came the reaction of the altered conditions."under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that restless energy, that with us is strength, would become weakness. even in our own time certain tendencies and desires, once necessary to survival, are a constant source of failure. physical courage and the love of battle, for instance, are no great help, may even be hindrances, to a civilized man.  and in a state of physical balance and security, power, intellectual as well as physical, would be out of place.  for countless years i judged there had been no danger of war or solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, no wasting disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil. for such a life, what we should call the weak are as well equipped as the strong, are indeed no longer weak. better equipped indeed they are, for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there was no outlet. no doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings i saw was the outcome of the last surgings of the now purposeless energy of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the conditions under which it lived, the flourish of that triumph which began the last great peace. this has ever been the fate of energy in security; it takes to art and to eroticism, and then come languor and decay."even this artistic impetus would at last die away, had almost died in the time i saw. to adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to sing in the sunlight: so much was left of the artistic spirit, and no more. even that would fade in the end into a contented inactivity. we are kept keen on the grindstone of pain and necessity, and, it seemed to me, that here was that hateful  grindstone broken at last!"as i stood there in the gathering dark i thought that in this simple explanation i had mastered the problem of the world, mastered the whole secret of these delicious people. possibly the checks they had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well, and their numbers had rather diminished than kept stationary. that would account for the abandoned ruins. very simple was my explanation, and plausible enough as most wrong theories are!chapter v"as i stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of man, the full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an overflow of silver light in the north-east. the bright little figures ceased to move about below, a noiseless owl flitted by, and i shivered with the chill of the night. i determined to descend and find where i could sleep."i looked for the building i knew. then my eye travelled along to the figure of the white sphinx upon the pedestal of bronze, growing distinct as the light of the rising moon grew brighter. i could see the silver birch against it. there was the tangle of rhododendron bushes, black in the pale light, and there was the little lawn. i looked at the lawn again. a queer doubt chilled my complacency. 'no,' said i stoutly to myself,' that was not the lawn.'"but it was the lawn. for the white leprous face of the sphinx was towards it. can you imagine what i felt as this conviction came home to me? but you cannot. the time machine was gone!"at once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of losing my own age, of being left helpless in this strange new world. the bare thought of it was an actual physical sensation. i could feel it grip me at the throat and stop my breathing. in another moment i was in a passion of fear and running with great leaping strides down the slope. once i fell headlong and cut my face; i lost no time in stanching the blood, but jumped up and ran on, with a warm trickle down my cheek and chin. all the time i ran i was saying to myself, 'they have moved it a little, pushed it under the bushes out of the way.' nevertheless, i ran with all my might. all the time, with the certainty that sometimes comes with excessive dread, i knew that such assurance was folly, knew instinctively that the machine was removed out of my reach. my breath came with pain. i suppose i covered the whole distance from the hill crest to the little lawn, two miles perhaps, in ten minutes. and i am not a young man. i cursed aloud, as i ran, at my confident folly in leaving the machine, wasting good breath thereby. i cried aloud, and none answered. not a creature seemed to be stirring in that moonlit world."when i reached the lawn my worst fears were realized. not a trace of the thing was to be seen. i felt faint and cold when i faced the empty space among the black tangle of bushes. i ran round it furiously, as if the thing might be hidden in a corner, and then stopped abruptly, with my hands clutching my hair. above me towered the sphinx, upon the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in the light of the rising moon. it seemed to smile in mockery of my dismay."i might have consoled myself by imagining the little people had put the mechanism in some shelter for me, had i not felt assured of their physical and intellectual inadequacy. that is what dismayed me: the sense of some hitherto unsuspected power, through whose intervention my invention had vanished. yet, for one thing i felt assured: unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate, the machine could not have moved in time. the attachment of the levers, i will show you the method later, prevented any one from tampering with it in that way when they were removed. it had moved, and was hid, only in space. but then, where could it be?"i think i must have had a kind of frenzy. i remember running violently in and out among the moonlit bushes all round the sphinx, and startling some white animal that, in the dim light, i took for a small deer. i remember, too, late that night, beating the bushes with my clenched fist until my knuckles were gashed and bleeding from the broken twigs. then, sobbing and raving in my anguish of mind, i went down to the great building of stone. the big hall was dark, silent, and deserted. i slipped on the uneven floor, and fell over one of the malachite tables, almost breaking my shin. i lit a match and went on past the dusty curtains, of which i have told you."there i found a second great hall covered with cushions, upon which, perhaps, a score or so of the little people were sleeping.  i have no doubt they found my second appearance strange enough, coming suddenly out of the quiet darkness with inarticulate noises and the splutter and flare of a match. for they had forgotten about matches. 'where is my time machine?' i began, bawling like an angry child, laying hands upon them and shaking them up together. it must have been very queer to them. some laughed, most of them looked sorely frightened. when i saw them standing round me, it came into my head that i was doing as foolish a thing as it was possible for me to do under the circumstances, in trying to revive the sensation of fear. for, reasoning from their daylight behaviour, i thought that fear must be forgotten."abruptly, i dashed down the match, and, knocking one of the people over in my course, went blundering across the big dining-hall again, out under the moonlight. i heard cries of terror and their little feet running and stumbling this way and that. i do not remember all i did as the moon crept up the sky. i suppose it was the unexpected nature of my loss that maddened me. i felt hopelessly cut off from my own kind, a strange animal in an unknown world. i must have raved to and fro, screaming and crying upon god and fate. i have a memory of horrible fatigue, as the long night of despair wore away; of looking in this impossible place and that; of groping among moonlit ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows; at last, of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute wretchedness. i had nothing left but misery. then i slept, and when i woke again it was full day, and a couple of sparrows were hopping round me on the turf within reach of my arm."i sat up in the freshness of the morning, trying to remember how i had got there, and why i had such a profound sense of desertion and despair. then things came clear in my mind. with the plain, reasonable daylight, i could look my circumstances fairly in the face. i saw the wild folly of my frenzy overnight, and i could reason with myself. 'suppose the worst?' i said. 'suppose the machine altogether lost perhaps destroyed?  it behoves me to be calm and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a clear idea of the method of my loss, and the means of getting materials and tools; so that in the end, perhaps, i may make another.' that would be my only hope, perhaps, but better than despair. and, after all, it was a beautiful and curious world."but probably, the machine had only been taken away. still, i must be calm and patient, find its hiding-place, and recover it by force or cunning. and with that i scrambled to my feet and looked about me, wondering where i could bathe. i felt weary, stiff, and travel-soiled. the freshness of the morning made me desire an equal freshness. i had exhausted my emotion. indeed, as i went about my business, i found myself wondering at my intense excitement overnight. i made a careful examination of the ground about the little lawn. i wasted some time in futile questionings, conveyed, as well as i was able, to such of the little people as came by. they all failed to understand my gestures; some were simply stolid, some thought it was a jest and laughed at me. i had the hardest task in the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces. it was a foolish impulse, but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger was ill curbed and still eager to take advantage of my perplexity. the turf gave better counsel. i found a groove ripped in it, about midway between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet where, on arrival, i had struggled with the overturned machine. there were other signs of removal about, with queer narrow footprints like those i could imagine made by a sloth. this directed my closer attention to the pedestal. it was, as i think i have said, of bronze. it was not a mere block, but highly decorated with deep framed panels on either side. i went and rapped at these. the pedestal was hollow. examining the panels with care i found them discontinuous with the frames. there were no handles or keyholes, but possibly the panels, if they were doors, as i supposed, opened from within. one thing was clear enough to my mind. it took no very great mental effort to infer that my time machine was inside that pedestal. but how it got there was a different problem."i saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the bushes and under some blossom-covered apple-trees towards me. i turned smiling to them and beckoned them to me. they came, and then, pointing to the bronze pedestal, i tried to intimate my wish to open it. but at my first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly. i don't know how to convey their expression to you. suppose you were to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman, it is how she would look. they went off as if they had received the last possible insult. i tried a sweet-looking little chap in white next, with exactly the same result. somehow, his manner made me feel ashamed of myself. but, as you know, i wanted the time machine, and i tried him once more. as he turned off, like the others, my temper got the better of me. in three strides i was after him, had him by the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began dragging him towards the sphinx. then i saw the horror and repugnance of his face, and all of a sudden i let him go."but i was not beaten yet. i banged with my fist at the bronze panels. i thought i heard something stir inside, to be explicit, i thought i heard a sound like a chuckle but i must have been mistaken. then i got a big pebble from the river, and came and hammered till i had flattened a coil in the decorations, and the verdigris came off in powdery flakes. the delicate little people must have heard me hammering in gusty outbreaks a mile away on either hand, but nothing came of it. i saw a crowd of them upon the slopes, looking furtively at me. at last, hot and tired, i sat down to watch the place. but i was too restless to watch long; i am too occidental for a long vigil. i could work at a problem for years, but to wait inactive for twenty-four hours, that is another matter."i got up after a time, and began walking aimlessly through the bushes towards the hill again. 'patience,' said i to myself. 'if you want your machine again you must leave that sphinx alone.  if they mean to take your machine away, it's little good your wrecking their bronze panels, and if they don't, you will get it back as soon as you can ask for it. to sit among all those unknown things before a puzzle like that is hopeless. that way lies monomania. face this world. learn its ways, watch it, be careful of too hasty guesses at its meaning. in the end you will find clues to it all.' then suddenly the humour of the situation came into my mind: the thought of the years i had spent in study and toil to get into the future age, and now my passion of anxiety to get out of it. i had made myself the most complicated and the most hopeless trap that ever a man devised. although it was at my own expense, i could not help myself. i laughed aloud."going through the big palace, it seemed to me that the little people avoided me. it may have been my fancy, or it may have had something to do with my hammering at the gates of bronze. yet i felt tolerably sure of the avoidance. i was careful, however, to show no concern and to abstain from any pursuit of them, and in the course of a day or two things got back to the old footing. i made what progress i could in the language, and in addition i pushed my explorations here and there. either i missed some subtle point or their language was excessively simple, almost exclusively composed of concrete substantives and verbs. there seemed to be few, if any, abstract terms, or little use of figurative language. their sentences were usually simple and of two words, and i failed to convey or understand any but the simplest propositions. i determined to put the thought of my time machine and the mystery of the bronze doors under the sphinx as much as possible in a corner of memory, until my growing knowledge would lead me back to them in a natural way. yet a certain feeling, you may understand, tethered me in a circle of a few miles round the point of my arrival."so far as i could see, all the world displayed the same exuberant richness as the thames valley. from every hill i climbed i saw the same abundance of splendid buildings, endlessly varied in material and style, the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same blossom-laden trees and tree ferns. here and there water shone like silver, and beyond, the land rose into blue undulating hills, and so faded into the serenity of the sky. a peculiar feature, which presently attracted my attention, was the presence of certain circular wells, several, as it seemed to me, of a very great depth. one lay by the path up the hill, which i had followed during my first walk. like the others, it was rimmed with bronze, curiously wrought, and protected by a little cupola from the rain. sitting by the side of these wells, and peering down into the shafted darkness, i could see no gleam of water, nor could i start any reflection with a lighted match. but in all of them i heard a certain sound: a thud, thud, thud, like the beating of some big engine; and i discovered, from the flaring of my matches, that a steady current of air set down the shafts. further, i threw a scrap of paper into the throat of one, and, instead of fluttering slowly down, it was at once sucked swiftly out of sight."after a time, too, i came to connect these wells with tall towers standing here and there upon the slopes; for above them there was often just such a flicker in the air as one sees on a hot day above a sun-scorched beach. putting things together, i reached a strong suggestion of an extensive system of subterranean ventilation, whose true import it was difficult to imagine. i was at first inclined to associate it with the sanitary apparatus of these people. it was an obvious conclusion, but it was absolutely wrong."and here i must admit that i learned very little of drains and bells and modes of conveyance, and the like conveniences, during my time in this real future. in some of these visions of utopias and coming times which i have read, there is a vast amount of detail about building, and social arrangements, and so forth.  but while such details are easy enough to obtain when the whole world is contained in one's imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to a real traveller amid such realities as i found here. conceive the tale of london which a negro, fresh from central africa, would take back to his tribe! what would he know of railway companies, of social movements, of telephone and telegraph wires, of the parcels delivery company, and postal orders and the like? yet we, at least, should be willing enough to explain these things to him! and even of what he knew, how much could he make his untravelled friend either apprehend or believe? then, think how narrow the gap between a negro and a white man of our own times, and how wide the interval between myself and these of the golden age! i was sensible of much which was unseen, and which contributed to my comfort; but save for a general impression of automatic organization, i fear i can convey very little of the difference to your mind."in the matter of sepulchre, for instance, i could see no signs of crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs. but it occurred to me that, possibly, there might be cemeteries (or crematoria) somewhere beyond the range of my explorings. this, again, was a question i deliberately put to myself, and my curiosity was at first entirely defeated upon the point. the thing puzzled me, and i was led to make a further remark, which puzzled me still more: that aged and infirm among this people there were none."i must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories of an automatic civilization and a decadent humanity did not long endure. yet i could think of no other. let me put my difficulties. the several big palaces i had explored were mere living places, great dining-halls and sleeping apartments. i could find no machinery, no appliances of any kind. yet these people were clothed in pleasant fabrics that must at times need renewal, and their sandals, though undecorated, were fairly complex specimens of metal-work. somehow such things must be made. and the little people displayed no vestige of a creative tendency. there were no shops, no workshops, no sign of importations among them. they spent all their time in playing gently, in bathing in the river, in making love in a half-playful fashion, in eating fruit and sleeping. i could not see how things were kept going."then, again, about the time machine: something, i knew not what, had taken it into the hollow pedestal of the white sphinx. why? for the life of me i could not imagine. those waterless wells, too, those flickering pillars. i felt i lacked a clue. i felt  how shall i put it? suppose you found an inscription, with sentences here and there in excellent plain english, and interpolated therewith, others made up of words, of letters even, absolutely unknown to you? well, on the third day of my visit, that was how the world of eight hundred and two thousand seven hundred and one presented itself to me!"that day, too, i made a friend of a sort. it happened that, as i was watching some of the little people bathing in a shallow, one of them was seized with cramp and began drifting downstream. the main current ran rather swiftly, but not too strongly for even a moderate swimmer. it will give you an idea, therefore, of the strange deficiency in these creatures, when i tell you that none made the slightest attempt to rescue the weakly crying little thing which was drowning before their eyes. when i realized this, i hurriedly slipped off my clothes, and, wading in at a point lower down, i caught the poor mite and drew her safe to land. a little rubbing of the limbs soon brought her round, and i had the satisfaction of seeing she was all right before i left her. i had got to such a low estimate of her kind that i did not expect any gratitude from her. in that, however, i was wrong."this happened in the morning. in the afternoon i met my little woman, as i believe it was, as i was returning towards my centre from an exploration, and she received me with cries of delight and presented me with a big garland of flowers evidently made for me and me alone. the thing took my imagination. very possibly i had been feeling desolate. at any rate i did my best to display my appreciation of the gift. we were soon seated together in a little stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. the creature's friendliness affected me exactly as a child's might have done. we passed each other flowers, and she kissed my hands. i did the same to hers. then i tried talk, and found that her name was weena, which, though i don't know what it meant, somehow seemed appropriate enough.  that was the beginning of a queer friendship which lasted a week,  and ended as i will tell you!"she was exactly like a child. she wanted to be with me always.  she tried to follow me everywhere, and on my next journey out and about it went to my heart to tire her down, and leave her at last, exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. but the problems of the world had to be mastered. i had not, i said to myself, come into the future to carry on a miniature flirtation. yet her distress when i left her was very great, her expostulations at the parting were sometimes frantic, and i think, altogether, i had as much trouble as comfort from her devotion. nevertheless she was, somehow, a very great comfort. i thought it was mere childish affection that made her cling to me. until it was too late, i did not clearly know what i had inflicted upon her when i left her. nor until it was too late did i clearly understand what she was to me. for, by merely seeming fond of me, and showing in her weak, futile way that she cared for me, the little doll of a creature presently gave my return to the neighbourhood of the white sphinx almost the feeling of coming home; and i would watch for her tiny figure of white and gold so soon as i came over the hill."it was from her, too, that i learned that fear had not yet left the world. she was fearless enough in the daylight, and she had the oddest confidence in me; for once, in a foolish moment, i made threatening grimaces at her, and she simply laughed at them. but she dreaded the dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded black things. darkness to her was the one thing dreadful. it was a singularly passionate emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. i discovered then, among other things, that these little people gathered into the great houses after dark, and slept in droves. to enter upon them without a light was to put them into a tumult of apprehension. i never found one out of doors, or one sleeping alone within doors, after dark.  yet i was still such a blockhead that i missed the lesson of that fear, and in spite of weena's distress i insisted upon sleeping away from these slumbering multitudes."it troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me triumphed, and for five of the nights of our acquaintance, including the last night of all, she slept with her head pillowed on my arm. but my story slips away from me as i speak of her. it must have been the night before her rescue that i was awakened about dawn. i had been restless, dreaming most disagreeably that i was drowned, and that sea anemones were feeling over my face with their soft palps. i woke with a start, and with an odd fancy that some greyish animal had just rushed out of the chamber. i tried to get to sleep again, but i felt restless and uncomfortable. it was that dim grey hour when things are just creeping out of darkness, when everything is colourless and clear cut, and yet unreal. i got up, and went down into the great hall, and so out upon the flagstones in front of the palace. i thought i would make a virtue of necessity, and see the sunrise."the moon was setting, and the dying moonlight and the first pallor of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light. the bushes were inky black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky colourless and cheerless. and up the hill i thought i could see ghosts. there several times, as i scanned the slope, i saw white figures. twice i fancied i saw a solitary white, ape-like creature running  rather quickly up the hill, and once near the ruins i saw a leash  of them carrying some dark body. they moved hastily. i did not see what became of them. it seemed that they vanished among the  bushes. the dawn was still indistinct, you must understand. i was feeling that chill, uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known. i doubted my eyes."as the eastern sky grew brighter, and the light of the day came on and its vivid colouring returned upon the world once more, i scanned the view keenly. but i saw no vestige of my white figures. they were mere creatures of the half-light. 'they must have been ghosts,' i said; 'i wonder whence they dated.' for a queer notion of grant allen's came into my head, and amused me. if each generation die and leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with them. on that theory they would have grown innumerable some eight hundred thousand years hence, and it was no great wonder to see four at once. but the jest was unsatisfying, and i was thinking of these figures all the morning, until weena's rescue drove them out of my head. i associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal i had startled in my first passionate search for the time machine. but weena was a pleasant substitute. yet all the same, they were soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind."i think i have said how much hotter than our own was the weather of this golden age. i cannot account for it. it may be that the sun was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun.  it is usual to assume that the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future. but people, unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger darwin, forget that the planets must ultimately fall back one by one into the parent body. as these catastrophes occur, the sun will blaze with renewed energy; and it may be that some inner planet had suffered this fate. whatever the reason, the fact remains that the sun was very much hotter than we know it."well, one very hot morning my fourth, i think, as i was seeking shelter from the heat and glare in a colossal ruin near the great house where i slept and fed, there happened this strange thing. clambering among these heaps of masonry, i found a narrow gallery, whose end and side windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone. by contrast with the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first impenetrably dark to me. i entered it groping, for the change from light to blackness made spots of colour swim before me. suddenly i halted spellbound. a pair of eyes, luminous by reflection against the daylight without, was watching me out of the darkness."the old instinctive dread of wild beasts came upon me. i clenched my hands and steadfastly looked into the glaring eyeballs. i was afraid to turn. then the thought of the absolute security in which humanity appeared to be living came to my mind. and then i remembered that strange terror of the dark. overcoming my fear to some extent, i advanced a step and spoke. i will admit that my voice was harsh and ill-controlled. i put out my hand and touched something soft. at once the eyes darted sideways, and something white ran past me. i turned with my heart in my mouth, and saw a queer little ape-like figure, its head held down in a peculiar manner, running across the sunlit space behind me. it blundered against a block of granite, staggered aside, and in a moment was hidden in a black shadow beneath another pile of ruined masonry."my impression of it is, of course, imperfect; but i know it was a dull white, and had strange large greyish-red eyes; also that there was flaxen hair on its head and down its back. but as i say, it went too fast for me to see distinctly. i cannot even say whether it ran on all fours, or only with its forearms held very low. after an instant's pause i followed it into the second heap of ruins. i could not find it at first; but, after a time in the profound obscurity, i came upon one of those round well-like openings of which i have told you, half closed by a fallen pillar. a sudden thought came to me. could this thing have vanished down the shaft? i lit a match, and, looking down, i saw a small, white, moving creature, with large bright eyes which regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. it made me shudder. it was so like a human spider! it was clambering down the wall, and now i saw for the first time a number of metal foot and hand rests forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. then the light burned my fingers and fell out of my hand, going out as it dropped, and when i had lit another the little monster had disappeared."i do not know how long i sat peering down that well. it was not for some time that i could succeed in persuading myself that the thing i had seen was human. but, gradually, the truth dawned on me: that man had not remained one species, but had differentiated into two distinct animals: that my graceful children of the upper-world were not the sole descendants of our generation, but that this bleached, obscene, nocturnal thing, which had flashed before me, was also heir to all the ages."i thought of the flickering pillars and of my theory of an underground ventilation. i began to suspect their true import. and what, i wondered, was this lemur doing in my scheme of a perfectly balanced organization? how was it related to the indolent serenity of the beautiful upper-worlders? and what was hidden down there, at the foot of that shaft? i sat upon the edge of the well telling myself that, at any rate, there was nothing to fear, and that there i must descend for the solution of my difficulties. and withal i was absolutely afraid to go! as i hesitated, two of the beautiful upper-world people came running in their amorous sport across the daylight in the shadow. the male pursued the female, flinging flowers at her as he ran."they seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned pillar, peering down the well. apparently it was considered bad form to remark these apertures; for when i pointed to this one, and tried to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were still more visibly distressed and turned away. but they were interested by my matches, and i struck some to amuse them. i tried them again about the well, and again i failed.  so presently i left them, meaning to go back to weena, and see what i could get from her. but my mind was already in revolution; my guesses and impressions were slipping and sliding to a new adjustment. i had now a clue to the import of these wells, to the ventilating towers, to the mystery of the ghosts; to say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze gates and the fate of the time machine! and very vaguely there came a suggestion towards the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me."here was the new view. plainly, this second species of man was subterranean. there were three circumstances in particular which made me think that its rare emergence above ground was the outcome of a long-continued underground habit. in the first place, there was the bleached look common in most animals that live largely in the dark, the white fish of the kentucky caves, for instance.  then, those large eyes, with that capacity for reflecting light, are common features of nocturnal things    witness the owl and the cat. and last of all, that evident confusion in the sunshine, that hasty yet fumbling awkward flight towards dark shadow, and that peculiar carriage of the head while in the light, all reinforced the theory of an extreme sensitiveness of the retina."beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunnelled enormously, and these tunnellings were the habitat of the new race. the presence of ventilating shafts and wells along the hill slopes    everywhere, in fact except along the river valley showed how universal were its ramifications. what so natural, then, as to assume that it was in this artificial underworld that such work as was necessary to the comfort of the daylight race was done?  the notion was so plausible that i at once accepted it, and went on to assume the how of this splitting of the human species. i dare say you will anticipate the shape of my theory; though, for myself, i very soon felt that it fell far short of the truth."at first, proceeding from the problems of our own age, it seemed clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of the present merely temporary and social difference between the capitalist and the labourer, was the key to the whole position. no doubt it will seem grotesque enough to you, and wildly incredible! and yet even now there are existing circumstances to point that way. there is a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental purposes of civilization; there is the metropolitan railway in london, for instance, there are new electric railways, there are subways, there are underground workrooms and restaurants, and they increase and multiply. evidently, i thought, this tendency had increased till industry had gradually lost its birthright in the sky. i mean that it had gone deeper and deeper into larger and ever larger underground factories, spending a still-increasing amount of its time therein, till, in the end!  even now, does not an east-end worker live in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut off from the natural surface of the earth?"again, the exclusive tendency of richer people due, no doubt, to the increasing refinement of their education, and the widening gulf between them and the rude violence of the poor, is already leading to the closing, in their interest, of considerable portions of the surface of the land. about london, for instance, perhaps half the prettier country is shut in against intrusion.  and this same widening gulf--which is due to the length and expense of the higher educational process and the increased facilities for and temptations towards refined habits on the part of the rich, will make that exchange between class and class, that promotion by intermarriage which at present retards the splitting of our species along lines of social stratification, less and less frequent. so, in the end, above ground you must have the haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort and beauty, and below ground the havenots, the workers getting continually adapted to the conditions of their labour. once they were there, they would no doubt have to pay rent, and not a little of it, for the ventilation of their caverns; and if they refused, they would starve or be suffocated for arrears. such of them as were so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die; and, in the end, the balance being permanent, the survivors would become as well adapted to the conditions of underground life, and as happy in their way, as the upper-world people were to theirs. as it seemed to me, the refined beauty and the etiolated pallor followed naturally enough."the great triumph of humanity i had dreamed of took a different shape in my mind. it had been no such triumph of moral education and general co-operation as i had imagined. instead, i saw a real aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working to a logical conclusion the industrial system of to-day. its triumph had not been simply a triumph over nature, but a triumph over nature and the fellow-man. this, i must warn you, was my theory at the time. i had no convenient cicerone in the pattern of the utopian books. my explanation may be absolutely wrong. i still think it is the most plausible one.  but even on this supposition the balanced civilization that was at last attained must have long since passed its zenith, and was now far fallen into decay. the too-perfect security of the upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of degeneration, to a general dwindling in size, strength, and intelligence. that i could see clearly enough already. what had happened to the under-grounders i did not yet suspect; but from what i had seen of the morlocks--that, by the by, was the name by which these creatures were called--i could imagine that the modification of the human type was even far more profound than among the 'eloi,' the beautiful race that i already knew."then came troublesome doubts. why had the morlocks taken my time machine? for i felt sure it was they who had taken it. why, too, if the eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? and why were they so terribly afraid of the dark? i proceeded, as i have said, to question weena about this underworld, but here again i was disappointed. at first she would not understand my questions, and presently she refused to answer them. she shivered as though the topic was unendurable. and when i pressed her, perhaps a little harshly, she burst into tears. they were the only tears, except my own, i ever saw in that golden age. when i saw them i ceased abruptly to trouble about the morlocks, and was only concerned in banishing these signs of the human inheritance from weena's eyes. and very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while i solemnly burned a match.chapter vi"it may seem odd to you, but it was two days before i could follow up the new-found clue in what was manifestly the proper way. i felt a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies. they were just the half-bleached colour of the worms and things one sees preserved in spirit in a zoological museum. and they were filthily cold to the touch. probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic influence of the eloi, whose disgust of the morlocks i now began to appreciate."the next night i did not sleep well. probably my health was a little disordered. i was oppressed with perplexity and doubt. once or twice i had a feeling of intense fear for which i could perceive no definite reason. i remember creeping noiselessly into the great hall where the little people were sleeping in the moonlight, that night weena was among them, and feeling reassured by their presence.  it occurred to me even then, that in the course of a few days the moon must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark, when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from below, these whitened lemurs, this new vermin that had replaced the old, might be more abundant.  and on both these days i had the restless feeling of one who shirks an inevitable duty. i felt assured that the time machine was only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these underground mysteries. yet i could not face the mystery. if only i had had a companion it would have been different. but i was so horribly alone, and even to clamber down into the darkness of the well appalled me. i don't know if you will understand my feeling, but i never felt quite safe at my back."it was this restlessness, this insecurity, perhaps, that drove me further and further afield in my exploring expeditions. going to the south-westward towards the rising country that is now called combe wood, i observed far off, in the direction of nineteenth-century banstead, a vast green structure, different in character from any i had hitherto seen. it was larger than the largest of the palaces or ruins i knew, and the facade had an oriental look: the face of it having the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind of bluish-green, of a certain type of chinese porcelain. this difference in aspect suggested a difference in use, and i was minded to push on and explore. but the day was growing late, and i had come upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit; so i resolved to hold over the adventure for the following day, and i returned to the welcome and the caresses of little weena. but next morning i perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the palace of green porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable me to shirk, by another day, an experience i dreaded. i resolved i would make the descent without further waste of time, and started out in the early morning towards a well near the ruins of granite and aluminium."little weena ran with me. she danced beside me to the well, but when she saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed strangely disconcerted. 'good-bye, little weena,' i said, kissing her; and then putting her down, i began to feel over the parapet for the climbing hooks. rather hastily, i may as well confess, for i feared my courage might leak away! at first she watched me in amazement. then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she began to pull at me with her little hands. i think her opposition nerved me rather to proceed. i shook her off, perhaps a little roughly, and in another moment i was in the throat of the well. i saw her agonized face over the parapet, and smiled to reassure her. then i had to look down at the unstable hooks to which i clung."i had to clamber down a shaft of perhaps two hundred yards. the descent was effected by means of metallic bars projecting from the sides of the well, and these being adapted to the needs of a creature much smaller and lighter than myself, i was speedily cramped and fatigued by the descent. and not simply fatigued! one of the bars bent suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into the blackness beneath. for a moment i hung by one hand, and after that experience i did not dare to rest again.  though my arms and back were presently acutely painful, i went on clambering down the sheer descent with as quick a motion as possible. glancing upward, i saw the aperture, a small blue disk, in which a star was visible, while little weena's head showed as a round black projection. the thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more oppressive. everything save that little disk above was profoundly dark, and when i looked up again weena had disappeared."i was in an agony of discomfort. i had some thought of trying to go up the shaft again, and leave the underworld alone. but even while i turned this over in my mind i continued to descend. at last, with intense relief, i saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a slender loophole in the wall.  swinging myself in, i found it was the aperture of a narrow horizontal tunnel in which i could lie down and rest. it was not too soon. my arms ached, my back was cramped, and i was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall. besides this, the unbroken darkness had had a distressing effect upon my eyes.  the air was full of the throb and hum of machinery pumping air down the shaft."i do not know how long i lay. i was roused by a soft hand touching my face.  starting up in the darkness i snatched at my matches and, hastily striking one, i saw three stooping white creatures similar to the one i had seen above ground in the ruin, hastily retreating before the light. living, as they did, in what appeared to me impenetrable darkness, their eyes were abnormally large and sensitive, just as are the pupils of the abysmal fishes, and they reflected the light in the same way. i have no doubt they could see me in that rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear of me apart from the light. but, so soon as i struck a match in order to see them, they fled incontinently, vanishing into dark gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared at me in the strangest fashion."i tried to call to them, but the language they had was apparently different from that of the upper-world people; so that i was left to my own unaided efforts, and the thought of flight before exploration was even then in my mind. but i said to myself, "you are in for it now," and, feeling my way along the tunnel, i found the noise of machinery grow louder. presently the walls fell away from me, and i came to a large open space, and striking another match, saw that i had entered a vast arched cavern, which stretched into utter darkness beyond the range of my light. the view i had of it was as much as one could see in the burning of a match."necessarily my memory is vague. great shapes like big machines rose out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black shadows, in which dim spectral morlocks sheltered from the glare. the place, by the by, was very stuffy and oppressive, and the faint halitus of freshly-shed blood was in the air. some way down the central vista was a little table of white metal, laid with what seemed a meal. the morlocks at any rate were carnivorous! even at the time, i remember wondering what large animal could have survived to furnish the red joint i saw. it was all very indistinct: the heavy smell, the big unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in the shadows, and only waiting for the darkness to come at me again! then the match burned down, and stung my fingers, and fell, a wriggling red spot in the blackness."i have thought since how particularly ill-equipped i was for such an experience. when i had started with the time machine, i had started with the absurd assumption that the men of the future would certainly be infinitely ahead of ourselves in all their appliances. i had come without arms, without medicine, without anything to smoke--at times i missed tobacco frightfully--even without enough matches. if only i had thought of a kodak! i could have flashed that glimpse of the underworld in a second, and examined it at leisure. but, as it was, i stood there with only the weapons and the powers that nature had endowed me with    hands, feet, and teeth; these, and four safety matches that still remained to me."i was afraid to push my way in among all this machinery in the dark, and it was only with my last glimpse of light i discovered that my store of matches had run low. it had never occurred to me until that moment that there was any need to economize them, and i had wasted almost half the box in astonishing the upper-worlders, to whom fire was a novelty. now, as i say, i had four left, and while i stood in the dark, a hand touched mine, lank fingers came feeling over my face, and i was sensible of a peculiar unpleasant odour. i fancied i heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful little beings about me. i felt the box of matches in my hand being gently disengaged, and other hands behind me plucking at my clothing. the sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably unpleasant. the sudden realization of my ignorance of their ways of thinking and doing came home to me very vividly in the darkness. i shouted at them as loudly as i could. they started away, and then i could feel them approaching me again. they clutched at me more boldly, whispering odd sounds to each other. i shivered violently, and shouted again rather discordantly. this time they were not so seriously alarmed, and they made a queer laughing noise as they came back at me. i will confess i was horribly frightened. i determined to strike another match and escape under the protection of its glare. i did so, and eking out the flicker with a scrap of paper from my pocket, i made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel. but i had scarce entered this when my light was blown out and in the blackness i could hear the morlocks rustling like wind among leaves, and pattering like the rain, as they hurried after me."in a moment i was clutched by several hands, and there was no mistaking that they were trying to haul me back. i struck another light, and waved it in their dazzled faces. you can scarce imagine how nauseatingly inhuman they looked, those pale, chinless faces and great, lidless, pinkish-grey eyes! as they stared in their blindness and bewilderment. but i did not stay to look, i promise you: i retreated again, and when my second match had ended, i struck my third.  it had almost burned through when i reached the opening into the shaft. i lay down on the edge, for the throb of the great pump below made me giddy.  then i felt sideways for the projecting hooks, and, as i did so, my feet were grasped from behind, and i was violently tugged backward. i lit my last match . . . and it incontinently went out. but i had my hand on the climbing bars now, and, kicking violently, i disengaged myself from the clutches of the morlocks and was speedily clambering up the shaft, while they stayed peering and blinking up at me: all but one little wretch who followed me for some way, and well-nigh secured my boot as a trophy."that climb seemed interminable to me. with the last twenty or thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. i had the greatest difficulty in keeping my hold. the last few yards was a frightful struggle against this faintness. several times my head swam, and i felt all the sensations of falling. at last, however, i got over the well-mouth somehow, and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding sunlight. i fell upon my face. even the soil smelt sweet and clean. then i remember weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of others among the eloi. then, for a time, i was insensible.chapter vii"now, indeed, i seemed in a worse case than before. hitherto, except during my night's anguish at the loss of the time machine, i had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but that hope was staggered by these new discoveries. hitherto i had merely thought myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people, and by some unknown forces which i had only to understand to overcome; but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of the morlocks, a something inhuman and malign. instinctively i loathed them. before, i had felt as a man might feel who had fallen into a pit: my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it. now i felt like a beast in a trap, whose enemy would come upon him soon."the enemy i dreaded may surprise you. it was the darkness of the new moon. weena had put this into my head by some at first incomprehensible remarks about the dark nights. it was not now such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming dark nights might mean. the moon was on the wane: each night there was a longer interval of darkness. and i now understood to some slight degree at least the reason of the fear of the little upper-world people for the dark. i wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that the morlocks did under the new moon. i felt pretty sure now that my second hypothesis was all wrong. the upper-world people might once have been the favoured aristocracy, and the morlocks their mechanical servants: but that had long since passed away. the two species that had resulted from the evolution of man were sliding down towards, or had already arrived at, an altogether new relationship. the eloi, like the carolvingian kings, had decayed to a mere beautiful futility. they still possessed the earth on sufferance: since the morlocks, subterranean for innumerable generations, had come at last to find the daylit surface intolerable. and the morlocks made their garments, i inferred, and maintained them in their habitual needs, perhaps through the survival of an old habit of service. they did it as a standing horse paws with his foot, or as a man enjoys killing animals in sport: because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the organism. but, clearly, the old order was already in part reversed. the nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace. ages ago, thousands of generations ago, man had thrust his brother man out of the ease and the sunshine. and now that brother was coming back changed! already the eloi had begun to learn one old lesson anew. they were becoming reacquainted with fear. and suddenly there came into my head the memory of the meat i had seen in the underworld. it seemed odd how it floated into my mind: not stirred up as it were by the current of my meditations, but coming in almost like a question from outside. i tried to recall the form of it. i had a vague sense of something familiar, but i could not tell what it was at the time."still, however helpless the little people in the presence of their mysterious fear, i was differently constituted. i came out of this age of ours, this ripe prime of the human race, when fear does not paralyse and mystery has lost its terrors. i at least would defend myself. without further delay i determined to make myself arms and a fastness where i might sleep. with that refuge as a base, i could face this strange world with some of that confidence i had lost in realizing to what creatures night by night i lay exposed. i felt i could never sleep again until my bed was secure from them. i shuddered with horror to think how they must already have examined me."i wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the thames, but found nothing that commended itself to my mind as inaccessible. all the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous climbers as the morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. then the tall pinnacles of the palace of green porcelain and the polished gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the evening, taking weena like a child upon my shoulder, i went up the hills towards the south-west. the distance, i had reckoned, was seven or eight miles, but it must have been nearer eighteen. i had first seen the place on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively diminished. in addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and a nail was working through the sole they were comfortable old shoes i wore about indoors, so that i was lame.  and it was already long past sunset when i came in sight of the palace, silhouetted black against the pale yellow of the sky."weena had been hugely delighted when i began to carry her, but after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers to stick in my pockets. my pockets had always puzzled weena, but at the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase for floral decoration. at least she utilized them for that purpose. and that reminds me!  in changing my jacket i found . . ."the time traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white mallows, upon the little table. then he resumed his narrative."as the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over the hill crest towards wimbledon, weena grew tired and wanted to return to the house of grey stone. but i pointed out the distant pinnacles of the palace of green porcelain to her, and contrived to make her understand that we were seeking a refuge there from her fear. you know that great pause that comes upon things before the dusk? even the breeze stops in the trees.  to me there is always an air of expectation about that evening stillness. the sky was clear, remote, and empty save for a few horizontal bars far down in the sunset. well, that night the expectation took the colour of my fears. in that darkling calm my senses seemed preternaturally sharpened. i fancied i could even feel the hollowness of the ground beneath my feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the morlocks on their ant-hill going hither and thither and waiting for the dark. in my excitement i fancied that they would receive my invasion of their burrows as a declaration of war. and why had they taken my time machine?"so we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened into night. the clear blue of the distance faded, and one star after another came out. the ground grew dim and the trees black. weena's fears and her fatigue grew upon her. i took her in my arms and talked to her and caressed her. then, as the darkness grew deeper, she put her arms round my neck, and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face against my shoulder. so we went down a long slope into a valley, and there in the dimness i almost walked into a little river. this i waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a number of sleeping houses, and by a statue, a faun, or some such figure, minus the head. here too were acacias.  so far i had seen nothing of the morlocks, but it was yet early in the night, and the darker hours before the old moon rose were still to come."from the brow of the next hill i saw a thick wood spreading wide and black before me. i hesitated at this. i could see no end to it, either to the right or the left. feeling tired--my feet, in particular, were very sore--i carefully lowered weena from my shoulder as i halted, and sat down upon the turf. i could no longer see the palace of green porcelain, and i was in doubt of my direction. i looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of what it might hide. under that dense tangle of branches one would be out of sight of the stars. even were there no other lurking danger--a danger i did not care to let my imagination loose upon--there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the tree-boles to strike against."i was very tired, too, after the excitements of the day; so i decided that i would not face it, but would pass the night upon the open hill."weena, i was glad to find, was fast asleep. i carefully wrapped her in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. the hillside was quiet and deserted, but from the black of the wood there came now and then a stir of living things. above me shone the stars, for the night was very clear. i felt a certain sense of friendly comfort in their twinkling. all the old constellations had gone from the sky, however: that slow movement which is imperceptible in a hundred human lifetimes, had long since rearranged them in unfamiliar groupings. but the milky way, it seemed to me, was still the same tattered streamer of star-dust as of yore. southward (as i judged it) was a very bright red star that was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own green sirius. and amid all these scintillating points of light one bright planet shone kindly and steadily like the face of an old friend."looking at these stars suddenly dwarfed my own troubles and all the gravities of terrestrial life. i thought of their unfathomable distance, and the slow inevitable drift of their movements out of the unknown past into the unknown future. i thought of the great precessional cycle that the pole of the earth describes. only forty times had that silent revolution occurred during all the years that i had traversed. and during these few revolutions all the activity, all the traditions, the complex organizations, the nations, languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of man as i knew him, had been swept out of existence. instead were these frail creatures who had forgotten their high ancestry, and the white things of which i went in terror. then i thought of the great fear that was between the two species, and for the first time, with a sudden shiver, came the clear knowledge of what the meat i had seen might be. yet it was too horrible! i looked at little weena sleeping beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and forthwith dismissed the thought."through that long night i held my mind off the morlocks as well as i could, and whiled away the time by trying to fancy i could find signs of the old constellations in the new confusion. the sky kept very clear, except for a hazy cloud or so. no doubt i dozed at times. then, as my vigil wore on, came a faintness in the eastward sky, like the reflection of some colourless fire, and the old moon rose, thin and peaked and white. and close behind, and overtaking it, and overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then growing pink and warm. no morlocks had approached us. indeed, i had seen none upon the hill that night. and in the confidence of renewed day it almost seemed to me that my fear had been unreasonable. i stood up and found my foot with the loose heel swollen at the ankle and painful under the heel; so i sat down again, took off my shoes, and flung them away."i awakened weena, and we went down into the wood, now green and pleasant instead of black and forbidding. we found some fruit wherewith to break our fast. we soon met others of the dainty ones, laughing and dancing in the sunlight as though there was no such thing in nature as the night. and then i thought once more of the meat that i had seen. i felt assured now of what it was, and from the bottom of my heart i pitied this last feeble rill from the great flood of humanity. clearly, at some time in the long-ago of human decay the morlocks' food had run short. possibly they had lived on rats and suchlike vermin. even now man is far less discriminating and exclusive in his food than he was far less than any monkey. his prejudice against human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. and so these inhuman sons of men! i tried to look at the thing in a scientific spirit. after all, they were less human and more remote than our cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago. and the intelligence that would have made this state of things a torment had gone. why should i trouble myself? these eloi were mere fatted cattle, which the ant-like morlocks preserved and preyed upon probably saw to the breeding of. and there was weena dancing at my side!"then i tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming upon me, by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human selfishness. man had been content to live in ease and delight upon the labours of his fellow-man, had taken necessity as his watchword and excuse, and in the fullness of time necessity had come home to him. i even tried a carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy in decay. but this attitude of mind was impossible. however great their intellectual degradation, the eloi had kept too much of the human form not to claim my sympathy, and to make me perforce a sharer in their degradation and their fear."i had at that time very vague ideas as to the course i should pursue. my first was to secure some safe place of refuge, and to make myself such arms of metal or stone as i could contrive.  that necessity was immediate. in the next place, i hoped to procure some means of fire, so that i should have the weapon of a torch at hand, for nothing, i knew, would be more efficient against these morlocks. then i wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the doors of bronze under the white sphinx. i had in mind a battering-ram. i had a persuasion that if i could enter those doors and carry a blaze of light before me i should discover the time machine and escape. i could not imagine the morlocks were strong enough to move it far away. weena i had resolved to bring with me to our own time. and turning such schemes over in my mind i pursued our way towards the building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.chapter viii"i found the palace of green porcelain, when we approached it about noon, deserted and falling into ruin.  only ragged vestiges of glass remained in its windows, and great sheets of the green facing had fallen away from the corroded metallic framework. it lay very high upon a turfy down, and looking north-eastward before i entered it, i was surprised to see a large estuary, or even creek, where i judged wandsworth and battersea must once have been. i thought then--though i never followed up the thought--of what might have happened, or might be happening, to the living things in the sea."the material of the palace proved on examination to be indeed porcelain, and along the face of it i saw an inscription in some unknown character. i thought, rather foolishly, that weena might help me to interpret this, but i only learned that the bare idea of writing had never entered her head. she always seemed to me, i fancy, more human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so human."within the big valves of the door--which were open and broken--we found, instead of the customary hall, a long gallery lit by many side windows. at the first glance i was reminded of a museum. the tiled floor was thick with dust, and a remarkable array of miscellaneous objects was shrouded in the same grey covering. then i perceived, standing strange and gaunt in the centre of the hall, what was clearly the lower part of a huge skeleton. i recognized by the oblique feet that it was some extinct creature after the fashion of the megatherium. the skull and the upper bones lay beside it in the thick dust, and in one place, where rain-water had dropped through a leak in the roof, the thing itself had been worn away. further in the gallery was the huge skeleton barrel of a brontosaurus. my museum hypothesis was confirmed. going towards the side i found what appeared to be sloping shelves, and clearing away the thick dust, i found the old familiar glass cases of our own time. but they must have been air-tight to judge from the fair preservation of some of their contents."clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day south kensington! here, apparently, was the paleontological section, and a very splendid array of fossils it must have been, though the inevitable process of decay that had been staved off for a time, and had, through the extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. here and there i found traces of the little people in the shape of rare fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon reeds. and the cases had in some instances been bodily removed--by the morlocks as i judged. the place was very silent. the thick dust deadened our footsteps. weena, who had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping glass of a case, presently came, as i stared about me, and very quietly took my hand and stood beside me."and at first i was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an intellectual age, that i gave no thought to the possibilities it presented. even my preoccupation about the time machine receded a little from my mind."to judge from the size of the place, this palace of green porcelain had a great deal more in it than a gallery of paleontology; possibly historical galleries; it might be, even a library! to me, at least in my present circumstances, these would be vastly more interesting than this spectacle of old-time geology in decay. exploring, i found another short gallery running transversely to the first. this appeared to be devoted to minerals, and the sight of a block of sulphur set my mind running on gunpowder. but i could find no saltpetre; indeed, no nitrates of any kind. doubtless they had deliquesced ages ago. yet the sulphur hung in my mind, and set up a train of thinking. as for the rest of the contents of that gallery, though on the whole they were the best preserved of all i saw, i had little interest. i am no specialist in mineralogy, and i went on down a very ruinous aisle running parallel to the first hall i had entered. apparently this section had been devoted to natural history, but everything had long since passed out of recognition. a few shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been stuffed animals, desiccated mummies in jars that had once held spirit, a brown dust of departed plants: that was all! i was sorry for that, because i should have been glad to trace the patent readjustments by which the conquest of animated nature had been attained. then we came to a gallery of simply colossal proportions, but singularly ill-lit, the floor of it running downward at a slight angle from the end at which i entered. at intervals white globes hung from the ceiling--many of them cracked and smashed--which suggested that originally the place had been artificially lit. here i was more in my element, for rising on either side of me were the huge bulks of big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some still fairly complete. you know i have a certain weakness for mechanism, and i was inclined to linger among these; the more so as for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and i could make only the vaguest guesses at what they were for. i fancied that if i could solve their puzzles i should find myself in possession of powers that might be of use against the morlocks."suddenly weena came very close to my side. so suddenly that she startled me. had it not been for her i do not think i should have noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all.[footnote: it may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum was built into the side of a hill. ed.]the end i had come in at was quite above ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. as you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows, until at last there was a pit like the 'area' of a london house before each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. i went slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too intent upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until weena's increasing apprehensions drew my attention. then i saw that the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. i hesitated, and then, as i looked round me, i saw that the dust was less abundant and its surface less even. further away towards the dimness, it appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. my sense of the immediate presence of the morlocks revived at that. i felt that i was wasting my time in the academic examination of machinery. i called to mind that it was already far advanced in the afternoon, and that i had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means of making a fire. and then down in the remote blackness of the gallery i heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises i had heard down the well."i took weena's hand. then, struck with a sudden idea, i left her and turned to a machine from which projected a lever not unlike those in a signal-box. clambering upon the stand, and grasping this lever in my hands, i put all my weight upon it sideways. suddenly weena, deserted in the central aisle, began to whimper. i had judged the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a minute's strain, and i rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than sufficient, i judged, for any morlock skull i might encounter. and i longed very much to kill a morlock or so. very inhuman, you may think, to want to go killing one's own descendants! but it was impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. only my disinclination to leave weena, and a persuasion that if i began to slake my thirst for murder my time machine might suffer, restrained me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes i heard."well, mace in one hand and weena in the other, i went out of that gallery and into another and still larger one, which at the first glance reminded me of a military chapel hung with tattered flags. the brown and charred rags that hung from the sides of it, i presently recognized as the decaying vestiges of books. they had long since dropped to pieces, and every semblance of print had left them. but here and there were warped boards and cracked metallic clasps that told the tale well enough. had i been a literary man i might, perhaps, have moralized upon the futility of all ambition. but as it was, the thing that struck me with keenest force was the enormous waste of labour to which this sombre wilderness of rotting paper testified. at the time i will confess that i thought chiefly of the philosophical  transactions and my own seventeen papers upon physical optics."then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have been a gallery of technical chemistry. and here i had not a little hope of useful discoveries. except at one end where the roof had collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. i went eagerly to every unbroken case. and at last, in one of the really air-tight cases, i found a box of matches. very eagerly i tried them. they were perfectly good. they were not even damp. i turned to weena. 'dance,' i cried to her in her own tongue. for now i had a weapon indeed against the horrible creatures we feared. and so, in that derelict museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to weena's huge delight, i solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling the land of the leal as cheerfully as i could. in part it was a modest cancan, in part a step dance, in part a skirt dance (so far as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. for i am naturally inventive, as you know."now, i still think that for this box of matches to have escaped the wear of time for immemorial years was a most strange, as for me it was a most fortunate thing. yet, oddly enough, i found a far unlikelier substance, and that was camphor. i found it in a sealed jar, that by chance, i suppose, had been really hermetically sealed. i fancied at first that it was paraffin wax, and smashed the glass accordingly. but the odour of camphor was unmistakable. in the universal decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive, perhaps through many thousands of centuries. it reminded me of a sepia painting i had once seen done from the ink of a fossil belemnite that must have perished and become fossilized millions of years ago. i was about to throw it away, but i remembered that it was inflammable and burned with a good bright flame was, in fact, an excellent candle and i put it in my pocket. i found no explosives, however, nor any means of breaking down the bronze doors. as yet my iron crowbar was the most helpful thing i had chanced upon. nevertheless i left that gallery greatly elated."i cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. it would require a great effort of memory to recall my explorations in at all the proper order. i remember a long gallery of rusting stands of arms, and how i hesitated between my crowbar and a hatchet or a sword. i could not carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised best against the bronze gates. there were numbers of guns, pistols, and rifles. the most were masses of rust, but many were of some new metal, and still fairly sound. but any cartridges or powder there may once have been had rotted into dust. one corner i saw was charred and shattered; perhaps, i thought, by an explosion among the specimens. in another place was a vast array of idols--polynesian, mexican, grecian, phoenician, every country on earth i should think. and here, yielding to an irresistible impulse, i wrote my name upon the nose of a steatite monster from south america that particularly took my fancy."as the evening drew on, my interest waned. i went through gallery after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruinous, the exhibits sometimes mere heaps of rust and lignite, sometimes fresher. in one place i suddenly found myself near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the merest accident i discovered, in an air-tight case, two dynamite cartridges! i shouted 'eureka!' and smashed the case with joy. then came a doubt. i hesitated. then, selecting a little side gallery, i made my essay. i never felt such a disappointment as i did in waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes for an explosion that never came. of course the things were dummies, as i might have guessed from their presence. i really believe that had they not been so, i should have rushed off incontinently and blown sphinx, bronze doors, and (as it proved) my chances of finding the time machine, all together into nonexistence."it was after that, i think, that we came to a little open court within the palace. it was turfed, and had three fruit-trees.  so we rested and refreshed ourselves. towards sunset i began to consider our position. night was creeping upon us, and my inaccessible hiding-place had still to be found. but that troubled me very little now. i had in my possession a thing that was, perhaps, the best of all defences against the morlocks--i had matches! i had the camphor in my pocket, too, if a blaze were needed. it seemed to me that the best thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open, protected by a fire. in the morning there was the getting of the time machine. towards that, as yet, i had only my iron mace. but now, with my growing knowledge, i felt very differently towards those bronze doors. up to this, i had refrained from forcing them, largely because of the mystery on the other side. they had never impressed me as being very strong, and i hoped to find my bar of iron not altogether inadequate for the work.chapter ix"we emerged from the palace while the sun was still in part above the horizon. i was determined to reach the white sphinx early the next morning, and ere the dusk i purposed pushing through the woods that had stopped me on the previous journey. my plan was to go as far as possible that night, and then, building a fire, to sleep in the protection of its glare. accordingly, as we went along i gathered any sticks or dried grass i saw, and presently had my arms full of such litter. thus loaded, our progress was slower than i had anticipated, and besides weena was tired. and i began to suffer from sleepiness too; so that it was full night before we reached the wood. upon the shrubby hill of its edge weena would have stopped, fearing the darkness before us; but a singular sense of impending calamity, that should indeed have served me as a warning, drove me onward. i had been without sleep for a night and two days, and i was feverish and irritable. i felt sleep coming upon me, and the morlocks with it."while we hesitated, among the black bushes behind us, and dim against their blackness, i saw three crouching figures. there was scrub and long grass all about us, and i did not feel safe from their insidious approach. the forest, i calculated, was rather less than a mile across. if we could get through it to the bare hill-side, there, as it seemed to me, was an altogether safer resting-place; i thought that with my matches and my camphor i could contrive to keep my path illuminated through the woods. yet it was evident that if i was to flourish matches with my hands i should have to abandon my firewood; so, rather reluctantly, i put it down. and then it came into my head that i would amaze our friends behind by lighting it. i was to discover the atrocious folly of this proceeding, but it came to my mind as an ingenious move for covering our retreat."i don't know if you have ever thought what a rare thing flame must be in the absence of man and in a temperate climate. the sun's heat is rarely strong enough to burn, even when it is focused by dewdrops, as is sometimes the case in more tropical districts. lightning may blast and blacken, but it rarely gives rise to widespread fire. decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with the heat of its fermentation, but this rarely results in flame. in this decadence, too, the art of fire-making had been forgotten on the earth. the red tongues that went licking up my heap of wood were an altogether new and strange thing to weena."she wanted to run to it and play with it. i believe she would have cast herself into it had i not restrained her. but i caught her up, and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly before me into the wood. for a little way the glare of my fire lit the path. looking back presently, i could see, through the crowded stems, that from my heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent, and a curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill. i laughed at that, and turned again to the dark trees before me. it was very black, and weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light for me to avoid the stems. overhead it was simply black, except where a gap of remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there. i struck none of my matches because i had no hand free. upon my left arm i carried my little one, in my right hand i had my iron bar."for some way i heard nothing but the crackling twigs under my feet, the faint rustle of the breeze above, and my own breathing and the throb of the blood-vessels in my ears. then i seemed to know of a pattering about me. i pushed on grimly. the pattering grew more distinct, and then i caught the same queer sound and voices i had heard in the underworld. there were evidently several of the morlocks, and they were closing in upon me. indeed, in another minute i felt a tug at my coat, then something at my arm. and weena shivered violently, and became quite still."it was time for a match. but to get one i must put her down. i did so, and, as i fumbled with my pocket, a struggle began in the darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the same peculiar cooing sounds from the morlocks. soft little hands, too, were creeping over my coat and back, touching even my neck. then the match scratched and fizzed. i held it flaring, and saw the white backs of the morlocks in flight amid the trees. i hastily took a lump of camphor from my pocket, and prepared to light it as soon as the match should wane.  then i looked at weena. she was lying clutching my feet and quite motionless, with her face to the ground. with a sudden fright i stooped to her. she seemed scarcely to breathe. i lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground, and as it split and flared up and drove back the morlocks and the shadows, i knelt down and lifted her. the wood behind seemed full of the stir and murmur of a great company!"she seemed to have fainted. i put her carefully upon my shoulder and rose to push on, and then there came a horrible realization. in maneuvering with my matches and weena, i had turned myself about several times, and now i had not the faintest idea in what direction lay my path. for all i knew, i might be facing back towards the palace of green porcelain. i found myself in a cold sweat. i had to think rapidly what to do. i determined to build a fire and encamp where we were. i put weena, still motionless, down upon a turfy bole, and very hastily, as my first lump of camphor waned, i began collecting sticks and leaves. here and there out of the darkness round me the morlocks' eyes shone like carbuncles."the camphor flickered and went out. i lit a match, and as i did so, two white forms that had been approaching weena dashed hastily away. one was so blinded by the light that he came straight for me, and i felt his bones grind under the blow of my fist. he gave a whoop of dismay, staggered a little way, and fell down. i lit another piece of camphor, and went on gathering my bonfire. presently i noticed how dry was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival on the time machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. so, instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, i began leaping up and dragging down branches. very soon i had a choking smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and could economize my camphor. then i turned to where weena lay beside my iron mace. i tried what i could to revive her, but she lay like one dead. i could not even satisfy myself whether or not she breathed."now, the smoke of the fire beat over towards me, and it must have made me heavy of a sudden. moreover, the vapour of camphor was in the air. my fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so. i felt very weary after my exertion, and sat down. the wood, too, was full of a slumbrous murmur that i did not understand. i seemed just to nod and open my eyes. but all was dark, and the morlocks had their hands upon me. flinging off their clinging fingers i hastily felt in my pocket for the match-box, and it had gone! then they gripped and closed with me again. in a moment i knew what had happened. i had slept, and my fire had gone out, and the bitterness of death came over my soul. the forest seemed full of the smell of burning wood. i was caught by the neck, by the hair, by the arms, and pulled down. it was indescribably horrible in the darkness to feel all these soft creatures heaped upon me. i felt as if i was in a monstrous spider's web. i was overpowered, and went down. i felt little teeth nipping at my neck. i rolled over, and as i did so my hand came against my iron lever. it gave me strength. i struggled up, shaking the human rats from me, and, holding the bar short, i thrust where i judged their faces might be. i could feel the succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows, and for a moment i was free."the strange exultation that so often seems to accompany hard fighting came upon me. i knew that both i and weena were lost, but i determined to make the morlocks pay for their meat. i stood with my back to a tree, swinging the iron bar before me. the whole wood was full of the stir and cries of them. a minute passed. their voices seemed to rise to a higher pitch of excitement, and their movements grew faster. yet none came within reach. i stood glaring at the blackness. then suddenly came hope. what if the morlocks were afraid? and close on the heels of that came a strange thing. the darkness seemed to grow luminous. very dimly i began to see the morlocks about me three battered at my feet--and then i recognized, with incredulous surprise, that the others were running, in an incessant stream, as it seemed, from behind me, and away through the wood in front.  and their backs seemed no longer white, but reddish. as i stood agape, i saw a little red spark go drifting across a gap of starlight between the branches, and vanish. and at that i understood the smell of burning wood, the slumbrous murmur that was growing now into a gusty roar, the red glow, and the morlocks' flight."stepping out from behind my tree and looking back, i saw, through the black pillars of the nearer trees, the flames of the burning forest. it was my first fire coming after me. with that i looked for weena, but she was gone. the hissing and crackling behind me, the explosive thud as each fresh tree burst into flame, left little time for reflection. my iron bar still gripped, i followed in the morlocks' path. it was a close race. once the flames crept forward so swiftly on my right as i ran that i was outflanked and had to strike off to the left. but at last i emerged upon a small open space, and as i did so, a morlock came blundering towards me, and past me, and went on straight into the fire!"and now i was to see the most weird and horrible thing, i think, of all that i beheld in that future age. this whole space was as bright as day with the reflection of the fire. in the centre was a hillock or tumulus, surmounted by a scorched hawthorn. beyond this was another arm of the burning forest, with yellow tongues already writhing from it, completely encircling the space with a fence of fire. upon the hill-side were some thirty or forty morlocks, dazzled by the light and heat, and blundering hither and thither against each other in their bewilderment. at first i did not realize their blindness, and struck furiously at them with my bar, in a frenzy of fear, as they approached me, killing one and crippling several more. but when i had watched the gestures of one of them groping under the hawthorn against the red sky, and heard their moans, i was assured of their absolute helplessness and misery in the glare, and i struck no more of them."yet every now and then one would come straight towards me, setting loose a quivering horror that made me quick to elude him. at one time the flames died down somewhat, and i feared the foul creatures would presently be able to see me. i was thinking of beginning the fight by killing some of them before this should happen; but the fire burst out again brightly, and i stayed my hand. i walked about the hill among them and avoided them, looking for some trace of weena. but weena was gone."at last i sat down on the summit of the hillock, and watched this strange incredible company of blind things groping to and fro, and making uncanny noises to each other, as the glare of the fire beat on them. the coiling uprush of smoke streamed across the sky, and through the rare tatters of that red canopy, remote as though they belonged to another universe, shone the little stars. two or three morlocks came blundering into me, and i drove them off with blows of my fists, trembling as i did so."for the most part of that night i was persuaded it was a nightmare. i bit myself and screamed in a passionate desire to awake. i beat the ground with my hands, and got up and sat down again, and wandered here and there, and again sat down. then i would fall to rubbing my eyes and calling upon god to let me awake. thrice i saw morlocks put their heads down in a kind of agony and rush into the flames. but, at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the streaming masses of black smoke and the whitening and blackening tree stumps, and the diminishing numbers of these dim creatures, came the white light of the day."i searched again for traces of weena, but there were none. it was plain that they had left her poor little body in the forest. i cannot describe how it relieved me to think that it had escaped the awful fate to which it seemed destined. as i thought of that, i was almost moved to begin a massacre of the helpless abominations about me, but i contained myself. the hillock, as i have said, was a kind of island in the forest. from its summit i could now make out through a haze of smoke the palace of green porcelain, and from that i could get my bearings for the white sphinx. and so, leaving the remnant of these damned souls still going hither and thither and moaning, as the day grew clearer, i tied some grass about my feet and limped on across smoking ashes and among black stems, that still pulsated internally with fire, towards the hiding place of the time machine. i walked slowly, for i was almost exhausted, as well as lame, and i felt the intensest wretchedness for the horrible death of little weena. it seemed an overwhelming calamity. now, in this old familiar room, it is more like the sorrow of a dream than an actual loss. but that morning it left me absolutely lonely again--terribly alone. i began to think of this house of mine, of this fireside, of some of you, and with such thoughts came a longing that was pain."but as i walked over the smoking ashes under the bright morning sky, i made a discovery. in my trouser pocket were still some loose matches. the box must have leaked before it was lost.chapter x"about eight or nine in the morning i came to the same seat of yellow metal from which i had viewed the world upon the evening of my arrival. i thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence. here was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river running between its fertile banks. the gay robes of the beautiful people moved hither and thither among the trees. some were bathing in exactly the place where i had saved weena, and that suddenly gave me a keen stab of pain. and like blots upon the landscape rose the cupolas above the ways to the under-world. i understood now what all the beauty of the over- world people covered. very pleasant was their day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. like the cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs. and their end was the same."i grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had been. it had committed suicide. it had set itself steadfastly towards comfort and ease, a balanced society with security and permanency as its watchword, it had attained its hopes to come to this at last. once, life and property must have reached almost absolute safety. the rich had been assured of his wealth and comfort, the toiler assured of his life and work. no doubt in that perfect world there had been no unemployed problem, no social question left unsolved. and a great quiet had followed."it is a law of nature we overlook, that intellectual versatility is the compensation for change, danger, and trouble. an animal perfectly in harmony with its environment is a perfect mechanism. nature never appeals to intelligence until habit and instinct are useless. there is no intelligence where there is no change and no need of change. only those animals partake of intelligence that have to meet a huge variety of needs and dangers."so, as i see it, the upper-world man had drifted towards his feeble prettiness, and the under-world to mere mechanical industry. but that perfect state had lacked one thing even for mechanical perfection--absolute permanency. apparently as time went on, the feeding of the under-world, however it was effected, had become disjointed. mother necessity, who had been staved off for a few thousand years, came back again, and she began below. the under-world being in contact with machinery, which, however perfect, still needs some little thought outside habit, had probably retained perforce rather more initiative, if less of every other human character, than the upper. and when other meat failed them, they turned to what old habit had hitherto forbidden. so i say i saw it in my last view of the world of eight hundred and two thousand seven hundred and one. it may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit could invent. it is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as that i give it to you."after the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past days, and in spite of my grief, this seat and the tranquil view and the warm sunlight were very pleasant. i was very tired and sleepy, and soon my theorizing passed into dozing. catching myself at that, i took my own hint, and spreading myself out upon the turf i had a long and refreshing sleep."i awoke a little before sunsetting. i now felt safe against being caught napping by the morlocks, and, stretching myself, i came on down the hill towards the white sphinx. i had my crowbar in one hand, and the other hand played with the matches in my pocket."and now came a most unexpected thing. as i approached the pedestal of the sphinx i found the bronze valves were open. they had slid down into grooves."at that i stopped short before them, hesitating to enter."within was a small apartment, and on a raised place in the corner of this was the time machine. i had the small levers in my pocket. so here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the white sphinx, was a meek surrender. i threw my iron bar away, almost sorry not to use it."a sudden thought came into my head as i stooped towards the portal. for once, at least, i grasped the mental operations of the morlocks.  suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, i stepped through the bronze frame and up to the time machine. i was surprised to find it had been carefully oiled and cleaned. i have suspected since that the morlocks had even partially taken it to pieces while trying in their dim way to grasp its purpose."now as i stood and examined it, finding a pleasure in the mere touch of the contrivance, the thing i had expected happened. the bronze panels suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang.  i was in the dark--trapped. so the morlocks thought. at that i chuckled gleefully."i could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came towards me. very calmly i tried to strike the match. i had only to fix on the levers and depart then like a ghost. but i had overlooked one little thing. the matches were of that abominable kind that light only on the box."you may imagine how all my calm vanished. the little brutes were close upon me. one touched me. i made a sweeping blow in the dark at them with the levers, and began to scramble into the saddle of the machine. then came one hand upon me and then another. then i had simply to fight against their persistent fingers for my levers, and at the same time feel for the studs over which these fitted. one, indeed, they almost got away from me. as it slipped from my hand, i had to butt in the dark with my head--i could hear the morlock's skull ring--to recover it. it was a nearer thing than the fight in the forest, i think, this last scramble."but at last the lever was fitted and pulled over. the clinging hands slipped from me. the darkness presently fell from my eyes.  i found myself in the same grey light and tumult i have already described.chapter xi"i have already told you of the sickness and confusion that comes with time travelling. and this time i was not seated properly in the saddle, but sideways and in an unstable fashion. for an indefinite time i clung to the machine as it swayed and vibrated, quite unheeding how i went, and when i brought myself to look at the dials again i was amazed to find where i had arrived. one dial records days, and another thousands of days, another millions of days, and another thousands of millions. now, instead of reversing the levers, i had pulled them over so as to go forward with them, and when i came to look at these indicators i found that the thousands hand was sweeping round as fast as the seconds hand of a watch into futurity."as i drove on, a peculiar change crept over the appearance of things. the palpitating greyness grew darker; then--though i was still travelling with prodigious velocity--the blinking succession of day and night, which was usually of a slower pace, returned, and grew more and more marked. this puzzled me very much at first. the alternations of night and day grew slower and slower, and so did the passage of the sun across the sky, until they seemed to stretch through centuries. at last a steady twilight brooded over the earth, a twilight only broken now and then when a comet glared across the darkling sky. the band of light that had indicated the sun had long since disappeared; for the sun had ceased to set--it simply rose and fell in the west, and grew ever broader and more red.  all trace of the moon had vanished. the circling of the stars, growing slower and slower, had given place to creeping points of light. at last, some time before i stopped, the sun, red and very large, halted motionless upon the horizon, a vast dome glowing with a dull heat, and now and then suffering a momentary extinction. at one time it had for a little while glowed more brilliantly again, but it speedily reverted to its sullen red heat. i perceived by this slowing down of its rising and setting that the work of the tidal drag was done. the earth had come to rest with one face to the sun, even as in our own time the moon faces the earth. very cautiously, for i remembered my former headlong fall, i began to reverse my motion. slower and slower went the circling hands until the thousands one seemed motionless and the daily one was no longer a mere mist upon its scale. still slower, until the dim outlines of a desolate beach grew visible."i stopped very gently and sat upon the time machine, looking round. the sky was no longer blue. north-eastward it was inky black, and out of the blackness shone brightly and steadily the pale white stars. overhead it was a deep indian red and starless, and south-eastward it grew brighter to a glowing scarlet where, cut by the horizon, lay the huge hull of the sun, red and motionless. the rocks about me were of a harsh reddish colour, and all the trace of life that i could see at first was the intensely green vegetation that covered every projecting point on their south-eastern face. it was the same rich green that one sees on forest moss or on the lichen in caves: plants which like these grow in a perpetual twilight."the machine was standing on a sloping beach. the sea stretched away to the south-west, to rise into a sharp bright horizon against the wan sky. there were no breakers and no waves, for not a breath of wind was stirring. only a slight oily swell rose and fell like a gentle breathing, and showed that the eternal sea was still moving and living. and along the margin where the water sometimes broke was a thick incrustation of salt--pink under the lurid sky. there was a sense of oppression in my head, and i noticed that i was breathing very fast. the sensation reminded me of my only experience of mountaineering, and from that i judged the air to be more rarefied than it is now."far away up the desolate slope i heard a harsh scream, and saw a thing like a huge white butterfly go slanting and flittering up into the sky and, circling, disappear over some low hillocks beyond. the sound of its voice was so dismal that i shivered and seated myself more firmly upon the machine. looking round me again, i saw that, quite near, what i had taken to be a reddish mass of rock was moving slowly towards me. then i saw the thing was really a monstrous crab-like creature. can you imagine a crab as large as yonder table, with its many legs moving slowly and uncertainly, its big claws swaying, its long antennae, like carters' whips, waving and feeling, and its stalked eyes gleaming at you on either side of its metallic front? its back was corrugated and ornamented with ungainly bosses, and a greenish incrustation blotched it here and there. i could see the many palps of its complicated mouth flickering and feeling as it moved."as i stared at this sinister apparition crawling towards me, i felt a tickling on my cheek as though a fly had lighted there. i tried to brush it away with my hand, but in a moment it returned, and almost immediately came another by my ear. i struck at this, and caught something threadlike. it was drawn swiftly out of my hand. with a frightful qualm, i turned, and i saw that i had grasped the antenna of another monster crab that stood just behind me. its evil eyes were wriggling on their stalks, its mouth was all alive with appetite, and its vast ungainly claws, smeared with an algal slime, were descending upon me. in a moment my hand was on the lever, and i had placed a month between myself and these monsters. but i was still on the same beach, and i saw them distinctly now as soon as i stopped. dozens of them seemed to be crawling here and there, in the sombre light, among the foliated sheets of intense green."i cannot convey the sense of abominable desolation that hung over the world. the red eastern sky, the northward blackness, the salt dead sea, the stony beach crawling with these foul, slow-stirring monsters, the uniform poisonous-looking green of the lichenous plants, the thin air that hurts one's lungs: all contributed to an appalling effect. i moved on a hundred years, and there was the same red sun--a little larger, a little duller--the same dying sea, the same chill air, and the same crowd of earthy crustacea creeping in and out among the green weed and the red rocks. and in the westward sky, i saw a curved pale line like a vast new moon."so i travelled, stopping ever and again, in great strides of a thousand years or more, drawn on by the mystery of the earth's fate, watching with a strange fascination the sun grow larger and duller in the westward sky, and the life of the old earth ebb away. at last, more than thirty million years hence, the huge red-hot dome of the sun had come to obscure nearly a tenth part of the darkling heavens. then i stopped once more, for the crawling multitude of crabs had disappeared, and the red beach, save for its livid green liverworts and lichens, seemed lifeless. and now it was flecked with white. a bitter cold assailed me. rare white flakes ever and again came eddying down. to the north-eastward, the glare of snow lay under the starlight of the sable sky and i could see an undulating crest of hillocks pinkish white. there were fringes of ice along the sea margin, with drifting masses further out; but the main expanse of that salt ocean, all bloody under the eternal sunset, was still unfrozen."i looked about me to see if any traces of animal life remained.  a certain indefinable apprehension still kept me in the saddle of the machine. but i saw nothing moving, in earth or sky or sea. the green slime on the rocks alone testified that life was not extinct. a shallow sandbank had appeared in the sea and the water had receded from the beach. i fancied i saw some black object flopping about upon this bank, but it became motionless as i looked at it, and i judged that my eye had been deceived, and that the black object was merely a rock. the stars in the sky were intensely bright and seemed to me to the transit of an inner planet passing very near to the earth."the darkness grew apace; a cold wind began to blow in freshening gusts from the east, and the showering white flakes in the air increased in number. from the edge of the sea came a ripple and whisper. beyond these lifeless sounds the world was silent. silent? it would be hard to convey the stillness of it. all the sounds of man, the bleating of sheep, the cries of birds, the hum of insects, the stir that makes the background of our lives    all that was over. as the darkness thickened, the eddying flakes grew more abundant, dancing before my eyes; and the cold of the air more intense. at last, one by one, swiftly, one after the other, the white peaks of the distant hills vanished into blackness. the breeze rose to a moaning wind. i saw the black central shadow of the eclipse sweeping towards me. in another moment the pale stars alone were visible. all else was rayless obscurity.  the sky was absolutely black."a horror of this great darkness came on me. the cold, that smote to my marrow, and the pain i felt in breathing, overcame me. i shivered, and a deadly nausea seized me. then like a red-hot bow in the sky appeared the edge of the sun. i got off the machine to recover myself. i felt giddy and incapable of facing the return journey. as i stood sick and confused i saw again the moving thing upon the shoal--there was no mistake now that it was a moving thing--against the red water of the sea. it was a round thing, the size of a football perhaps, or, it may be, bigger, and tentacles trailed down from it; it seemed black against the weltering blood-red water, and it was hopping fitfully about. then i felt i was fainting. but a terrible dread of lying helpless in that remote and awful twilight sustained me while i clambered upon the saddle.chapter xii"so i came back. for a long time i must have been insensible upon the machine. the blinking succession of the days and nights was resumed, the sun got golden again, the sky blue. i breathed with greater freedom. the fluctuating contours of the land ebbed and flowed. the hands spun backward upon the dials. at last i saw again the dim shadows of houses, the evidences of decadent humanity. these, too, changed and passed, and others came. presently, when the million dial was at zero, i slackened speed. i began to recognize our own petty and familiar architecture, the thousands hand ran back to the starting-point, the night and day flapped slower and slower. then the old walls of the laboratory came round me. very gently, now, i slowed the mechanism down."i saw one little thing that seemed odd to me. i think i have told you that when i set out, before my velocity became very high, mrs. watchett had walked across the room, travelling, as it seemed to me, like a rocket. as i returned, i passed again across that minute when she traversed the laboratory. but now her every motion appeared to be the exact inversion of her previous ones. the door at the lower end opened, and she glided quietly up the laboratory, back foremost, and disappeared behind the door by which she had previously entered. just before that i seemed to see hillyer for a moment; but he passed like a flash."then i stopped the machine, and saw about me again the old familiar laboratory, my tools, my appliances just as i had left them. i got off the thing very shaky, and sat down upon my bench. for several minutes i trembled violently. then i became calmer. around me was my old workshop again, exactly as it had been. i might have slept there, and the whole thing have been a dream."and yet, not exactly! the thing had started from the south-east corner of the laboratory. it had come to rest again in the north-west, against the wall where you saw it. that gives you the exact distance from my little lawn to the pedestal of the white sphinx, into which the morlocks had carried my machine."for a time my brain went stagnant. presently i got up and came through the passage here, limping, because my heel was still painful, and feeling sorely begrimed. i saw the pall mall gazette on the table by the door. i found the date was indeed to-day, and looking at the timepiece, saw the hour was almost eight o'clock. i heard your voices and the clatter of plates. i hesitated--i felt so sick and weak. then i sniffed good wholesome meat, and opened the door on you. you know the rest. i washed, and dined, and now i am telling you the story."i know," he said, after a pause, "that all this will be absolutely incredible to you. to me the one incredible thing is that i am here to-night in this old familiar room looking into your friendly faces and telling you these strange adventures."he looked at the medical man. "no. i cannot expect you to believe it. take it as a lie--or a prophecy. say i dreamed it in the workshop. consider i have been speculating upon the destinies of our race until i have hatched this fiction. treat my assertion of its truth as a mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. and taking it as a story, what do you think of it?"he took up his pipe, and began, in his old accustomed manner, to tap with it nervously upon the bars of the grate. there was a momentary stillness. then chairs began to creak and shoes to scrape upon the carpet. i took my eyes off the time traveller's face, and looked round at his audience. they were in the dark, and little spots of colour swam before them. the medical man seemed absorbed in the contemplation of our host. the editor was looking hard at the end of his cigar--the sixth.  the journalist fumbled for his watch.  the others, as far as i remember, were motionless.the editor stood up with a sigh. "what a pity it is you're not a writer of stories!" he said, putting his hand on the time traveller's shoulder."you don't believe it?""well.""i thought not."the time traveller turned to us. "where are the matches?" he said. he lit one and spoke over his pipe, puffing. "to tell you the truth . . . i hardly believe it myself. . .  and yet . . ."his eye fell with a mute inquiry upon the withered white flowers upon the little table. then he turned over the hand holding his pipe, and i saw he was looking at some half-healed scars on his knuckles.the medical man rose, came to the lamp, and examined the flowers.  "the gyneaceum's odd," he said. the psychologist leant forward to see, holding out his hand for a specimen."i'm hanged if it isn't a quarter to one," said the journalist.  "how shall we get home?""plenty of cabs at the station," said the psychologist."it's a curious thing," said the medical man; "but i certainly don't know the natural order of these flowers. may i have them?"the time traveller hesitated. then suddenly: "certainly not.""where did you really get them?" said the medical man.the time traveller put his hand to his head. he spoke like one who was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. "they were put into my pocket by weena, when i travelled into time." he stared round the room. "i'm damned if it isn't all going.  this room and you and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. did i ever make a time machine, or a model of a time machine? or is it all only a dream? they say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at times--but i can't stand another that won't fit. it's madness. and where did the dream come from? . . . i must look at that machine. if there is  one!"he caught up the lamp swiftly, and carried it, flaring red, through the door into the corridor. we followed him. there in the flickering light of the lamp was the machine sure enough, squat, ugly, and askew; a thing of brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent glimmering quartz. solid to the touch--for i put out my hand and felt the rail of it--and with brown spots and smears upon the ivory, and bits of grass and moss upon the lower parts, and one rail bent awry.the time traveller put the lamp down on the bench, and ran his hand along the damaged rail. "it's all right now," he said. "the story i told you was true. i'm sorry to have brought you out here in the cold." he took up the lamp, and, in an absolute silence, we returned to the smoking-room.he came into the hall with us and helped the editor on with his coat. the medical man looked into his face and, with a certain hesitation, told him he was suffering from overwork, at which he laughed hugely. i remember him standing in the open doorway, bawling good night.i shared a cab with the editor. he thought the tale a "gaudy lie." for my own part i was unable to come to a conclusion. the story was so fantastic and incredible, the telling so credible and sober. i lay awake most of the night thinking about it. i determined to go next day and see the time traveller again. i was told he was in the laboratory, and being on easy terms in the house, i went up to him. the laboratory, however, was empty. i stared for a minute at the time machine and put out my hand and touched the lever. at that the squat substantial-looking mass swayed like a bough shaken by the wind. its instability startled me extremely, and i had a queer reminiscence of the childish days when i used to be forbidden to meddle. i came back through the corridor. the time traveller met me in the smoking-room. he was coming from the house. he had a small camera under one arm and a knapsack under the other. he laughed when he saw me, and gave me an elbow to shake. "i'm frightfully busy," said he, "with that thing in there.""but is it not some hoax?" i said. "do you really travel through time?""really and truly i do." and he looked frankly into my eyes. he hesitated. his eye wandered about the room. "i only want half an hour," he said. "i know why you came, and it's awfully good of you. there's some magazines here. if you'll stop to lunch i'll prove you this time travelling up to the hilt, specimen and all. if you'll forgive my leaving you now?"i consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his words, and he nodded and went on down the corridor. i heard the door of the laboratory slam, seated myself in a chair, and took up a daily paper. what was he going to do before lunch-time? then suddenly i was reminded by an advertisement that i had promised to meet richardson, the publisher, at two. i looked at my watch, and saw that i could barely save that engagement. i got up and went down the passage to tell the time traveller.as i took hold of the handle of the door i heard an exclamation, oddly truncated at the end, and a click and a thud. a gust of air whirled round me as i opened the door, and from within came the sound of broken glass falling on the floor. the time traveller was not there. i seemed to see a ghostly, indistinct figure sitting in a whirling mass of black and brass for a moment--a figure so transparent that the bench behind with its sheets of drawings was absolutely distinct; but this phantasm vanished as i rubbed my eyes. the time machine had gone. save for a subsiding stir of dust, the further end of the laboratory was empty. a pane of the skylight had, apparently, just been blown in.i felt an unreasonable amazement. i knew that something strange had happened, and for the moment could not distinguish what the strange thing might be. as i stood staring, the door into the garden opened, and the man-servant appeared.we looked at each other. then ideas began to come. "has mr. _____ gone out that way?" said i."no, sir. no one has come out this way. i was expecting to find him here."at that i understood. at the risk of disappointing richardson i stayed on, waiting for the time traveller; waiting for the second, perhaps still stranger story, and the specimens and photographs he would bring with him. but i am beginning now to fear that i must wait a lifetime. the time traveller vanished three years ago. and, as everybody knows now, he has never returned.epilogueone cannot choose but wonder. will he ever return? it may be that he swept back into the past, and fell among the blood-drinking, hairy savages of the age of unpolished stone; into the abysses of the cretaceous sea; or among the grotesque saurians, the huge reptilian brutes of the jurassic times. he may even now, if i may use the phrase, be wandering on some plesiosaurus-haunted oolitic coral reef, or beside the lonely saline lakes of the triassic age. or did he go forward, into one of the nearer ages, in which men are still men, but with the riddles of our own time answered and its wearisome problems solved? into the manhood of the race:  for i, for my own part cannot think that these latter days of weak experiment, fragmentary theory, and mutual discord are indeed man's culminating time! i say, for my own part. he, i know--for the question had been discussed among us long before the time machine was made--thought but cheerlessly of the advancement of mankind, and saw in the growing pile of civilisation only a foolish heaping that must inevitably fall back upon and destroy its makers in the end. if that is so, it remains for us to live as though it were not so. but to me the future is still black and blank--is a vast ignorance, lit at a few casual places by the memory of his story. and i have by me, for my comfort, two strange white flowers shrivelled now, and brown and flat and brittle to witness that even when mind and strength had gone, gratitude and a mutual tenderness still lived on in the heart of man.the endi"oh, there is one, of course, but you'll never know it."the assertion, laughingly flung out six months earlier in a bright june garden, came back to mary boyne with a sharp perception of its latent significance as she stood, in the december dusk, waiting for the lamps to be brought into the library.the words had been spoken by their friend alida stair, as they sat at tea on her lawn at pangbourne, in reference to the very house of which the library in question was the central, the pivotal "feature." mary boyne and her husband, in quest of a country place in one of the southern or southwestern counties, had, on their arrival in england, carried their problem straight to alida stair, who had successfully solved it in her own case; but it was not until they had rejected, almost capriciously, several practical and judicious suggestions that she threw it out: "well, there's lyng, in dorsetshire. it belongs to hugo's cousins, and you can get it for a song."the reasons she gave for its being obtainable on these terms -- its remoteness from a station, its lack of electric light, hot-water pipes, and other vulgar necessities -- were exactly those pleading in its favor with two romantic americans perversely in search of the economic drawbacks which were associated, in their tradition, with unusual architectural felicities."i should never believe i was living in an old house unless i was thoroughly uncomfortable," ned boyne, the more extravagant of the two, had jocosely insisted; "the least hint of 'convenience' would make me think it had been bought out of an exhibition, with the pieces numbered, and set up again." and they had proceeded to enumerate, with humorous precision, their various suspicions and exactions, refusing to believe that the house their cousin recommended was really tudor till they learned it had no heating system, or that the village church was literally in the grounds till she assured them of the deplorable uncertainty of the water supply."it's too uncomfortable to be true!" edward boyne had continued to exult as the avowal of each disadvantage was successively wrung from her; but he had cut short his rhapsody to ask, with a sudden relapse to distrust: "and the ghost? you've been concealing from us the fact that there is no ghost!"mary, at the moment, had laughed with him, yet almost with her laugh, being possessed of several sets of independent perceptions, had noted a sudden flatness of tone in alida's answering hilarity."oh, dorsetshire's full of ghosts, you know.""yes, yes; but that won't do. i don't want to have to drive ten miles to see somebody else's ghost. i want one of my own on the premises. is there a ghost at lyng?"his rejoinder had made alida laugh again, and it was then that she had flung back tantalizingly: "oh, there is one, of course, but you'll never know it.""never know it?" boyne pulled her up. "but what in the world constitutes a ghost except the fact of its being known for one?""i can't say. but that's the story.""that there's a ghost, but that nobody knows it's a ghost?""well -- not till afterward, at any rate.""till afterward?""not till long, long afterward.""but if it's once been identified as an unearthly visitant, why hasn't its signalement been handed down in the family? how has it managed to preserve its incognito?"alida could only shake her head. "don't ask me. but it has.""and then suddenly --" mary spoke up as if from some cavernous depth of divination --"suddenly, long afterward, one says to one's self, 'that was it?'"she was oddly startled at the sepulchral sound with which her question fell on the banter of the other two, and she saw the shadow of the same surprise flit across alida's clear pupils. "i suppose so. one just has to wait.""oh, hang waiting!" ned broke in. "life's too short for a ghost who can only be enjoyed in retrospect. can't we do better than that, mary?"but it turned out that in the event they were not destined to, for within three months of their conversation with mrs. stair they were established at lyng, and the life they had yearned for to the point of planning it out in all its daily details had actually begun for them.it was to sit, in the thick december dusk, by just such a widehooded fireplace, under just such black oak rafters, with the sense that beyond the mullioned panes the downs were darkening to a deeper solitude: it was for the ultimate indulgence in such sensations that mary boyne had endured for nearly fourteen years the soul-deadening ugliness of the middle west, and that boyne had ground on doggedly at his engineering till, with a suddenness that still made her blink, the prodigious windfall of the blue star mine had put them at a stroke in possession of life and the leisure to taste it. they had never for a moment meant their new state to be one of idleness; but they meant to give themselves only to harmonious activities. she had her vision of painting and gardening against a background of gray walls, he dreamed of the production of his long-planned book on the "economic basis of culture"; and with such absorbing work ahead no existence could be too sequestered; they could not get far enough from the world, or plunge deep enough into the past.dorsetshire had attracted them from the first by a semblance of remoteness out of all proportion to its geographical position. but to the boynes it was one of the ever-recurring wonders of the whole incredibly compressed island -- a nest of counties, as they put it -- that for the production of its effects so little of a given quality went so far: that so few miles made a distance, and so short a distance a difference."it's that," ned had once enthusiastically explained, "that gives such depth to their effects, such relief to their least contrasts. they've been able to lay the butter so thick on every exquisite mouthful."the butter had certainly been laid on thick at lyng: the old gray house, hidden under a shoulder of the downs, had almost all the finer marks of commerce with a protracted past. the mere fact that it was neither large nor exceptional made it, to the boynes, abound the more richly in its special sense -- the sense of having been for centuries a deep, dim reservoir of life. the life had probably not been of the most vivid order: for long periods, no doubt, it had fallen as noiselessly into the past as the quiet drizzle of autumn fell, hour after hour, into the green fish-pond between the yews; but these back-waters of existence sometimes breed, in their sluggish depths, strange acuities of emotion, and mary boyne had felt from the first the occasional brush of an intenser memory.the feeling had never been stronger than on the december afternoon when, waiting in the library for the belated lamps, she rose from her seat and stood among the shadows of the hearth. her husband had gone off, after luncheon, for one of his long tramps on the downs. she had noticed of late that he preferred to be unaccompanied on these occasions; and, in the tried security of their personal relations, had been driven to conclude that his book was bothering him, and that he needed the afternoons to turn over in solitude the problems left from the morning's work. certainly the book was not going as smoothly as she had imagined it would, and the lines of perplexity between his eyes had never been there in his engineering days. then he had often looked fagged to the verge of illness, but the native demon of "worry" had never branded his brow. yet the few pages he had so far read to her -- the introduction, and a synopsis of the opening chapter -- gave evidences of a firm possession of his subject, and a deepening confidence in his powers.the fact threw her into deeper perplexity, since, now that he had done with "business" and its disturbing contingencies, the one other possible element of anxiety was eliminated. unless it were his health, then? but physically he had gained since they had come to dorsetshire, grown robuster, ruddier, and fresher-eyed. it was only within a week that she had felt in him the undefinable change that made her restless in his absence, and as tongue-tied in his presence as though it were she who had a secret to keep from him!the thought that there was a secret somewhere between them struck her with a sudden smart rap of wonder, and she looked about her down the dim, long room."can it be the house?" she mused.the room itself might have been full of secrets. they seemed to be piling themselves up, as evening fell, like the layers and layers of velvet shadow dropping from the low ceiling, the dusky walls of books, the smoke-blurred sculpture of the hooded hearth."why, of course -- the house is haunted!" she reflected.the ghost -- alida's imperceptible ghost -- after figuring largely in the banter of their first month or two at lyng, had been gradually discarded as too ineffectual for imaginative use. mary had, indeed, as became the tenant of a haunted house, made the customary inquiries among her few rural neighbors, but, beyond a vague, "they du say so, ma'am," the villagers had nothing to impart. the elusive specter had apparently never had sufficient identity for a legend to crystallize about it, and after a time the boynes had laughingly set the matter down to their profit-and-loss account, agreeing that lyng was one of the few houses good enough in itself to dispense with supernatural enhancements."and i suppose, poor, ineffectual demon, that's why it beats its beautiful wings in vain in the void," mary had laughingly concluded."or, rather," ned answered, in the same strain, "why, amid so much that's ghostly, it can never affirm its separate existence as the ghost." and thereupon their invisible housemate had finally dropped out of their references, which were numerous enough to make them promptly unaware of the loss.now, as she stood on the hearth, the subject of their earlier curiosity revived in her with a new sense of its meaning -- a sense gradually acquired through close daily contact with the scene of the lurking mystery. it was the house itself, of course, that possessed the ghost-seeing faculty, that communed visually but secretly with its own past; and if one could only get into close enough communion with the house, one might surprise its secret, and acquire the ghost-sight on one's own account. perhaps, in his long solitary hours in this very room, where she never trespassed till the afternoon, her husband had acquired it already, and was silently carrying the dread weight of whatever it had revealed to him. mary was too well-versed in the code of the spectral world not to know that one could not talk about the ghosts one saw: to do so was almost as great a breach of goodbreeding as to name a lady in a club. but this explanation did not really satisfy her. "what, after all, except for the fun of the frisson," she reflected, "would he really care for any of their old ghosts?" and thence she was thrown back once more on the fundamental dilemma: the fact that one's greater or less susceptibility to spectral influences had no particular bearing on the case, since, when one did see a ghost at lyng, one did not know it."not till long afterward," alida stair had said. well, supposing ned had seen one when they first came, and had known only within the last week what had happened to him? more and more under the spell of the hour, she threw back her searching thoughts to the early days of their tenancy, but at first only to recall a gay confusion of unpacking, settling, arranging of books, and calling to each other from remote corners of the house as treasure after treasure of their habitation revealed itself to them. it was in this particular connection that she presently recalled a certain soft afternoon of the previous october, when, passing from the first rapturous flurry of exploration to a detailed inspection of the old house, she had pressed like a novel heroine a panel that opened at her touch, on a narrow flight of stairs leading to an unsuspected flat ledge of the roof -- the roof which, from below, seemed to slope away on all sides too abruptly for any but practised feet to scale.the view from this hidden coign was enchanting, and she had flown down to snatch ned from his papers and give him the freedom of her discovery. she remembered still how, standing on the narrow ledge, he had passed his arm about her while their gaze flew to the long, tossed horizon-line of the downs, and then dropped contentedly back to trace the arabesque of yew hedges about the fish-pond, and the shadow of the cedar on the lawn."and now the other way," he had said, gently turning her about within his arm; and closely pressed to him, she had absorbed, like some long, satisfying draft, the picture of the gray-walled court, the squat lions on the gates, and the lime-avenue reaching up to the highroad under the downs.it was just then, while they gazed and held each other, that she had felt his arm relax, and heard a sharp "hullo!" that made her turn to glance at him.distinctly, yes, she now recalled she had seen, as she glanced, a shadow of anxiety, of perplexity, rather, fall across his face; and, following his eyes, had beheld the figure of a man -- a man in loose, grayish clothes, as it appeared to her -- who was sauntering down the lime-avenue to the court with the tentative gait of a stranger seeking his way. her short-sighted eyes had given her but a blurred impression of slightness and grayness, with something foreign, or at least unlocal, in the cut of the figure or its garb; but her husband had apparently seen more -- seen enough to make him push past her with a sharp "wait!" and dash down the twisting stairs without pausing to give her a hand for the descent.a slight tendency to dizziness obliged her, after a provisional clutch at the chimney against which they had been leaning, to follow him down more cautiously; and when she had reached the attic landing she paused again for a less definite reason, leaning over the oak banister to strain her eyes through the silence of the brown, sun-flecked depths below. she lingered there till, somewhere in those depths, she heard the closing of a door; then, mechanically impelled, she went down the shallow flights of steps till she reached the lower hall.the front door stood open on the mild sunlight of the court, and hall and court were empty. the library door was open, too, and after listening in vain for any sound of voices within, she quickly crossed the threshold, and found her husband alone, vaguely fingering the papers on his desk.he looked up, as if surprised at her precipitate entrance, but the shadow of anxiety had passed from his face, leaving it even, as she fancied, a little brighter and clearer than usual."what was it? who was it?" she asked."who?" he repeated, with the surprise still all on his side."the man we saw coming toward the house."he seemed honestly to reflect. "the man? why, i thought i saw peters; i dashed after him to say a word about the stable-drains, but he had disappeared before i could get down.""disappeared? why, he seemed to be walking so slowly when we saw him."boyne shrugged his shoulders. "so i thought; but he must have got up steam in the interval. what do you say to our trying a scramble up meldon steep before sunset?"that was all. at the time the occurrence had been less than nothing, had, indeed, been immediately obliterated by the magic of their first vision from meldon steep, a height which they had dreamed of climbing ever since they had first seen its bare spine heaving itself above the low roof of lyng. doubtless it was the mere fact of the other incident's having occurred on the very day of their ascent to meldon that had kept it stored away in the unconscious fold of association from which it now emerged; for in itself it had no mark of the portentous. at the moment there could have been nothing more natural than that ned should dash himself from the roof in the pursuit of dilatory tradesmen. it was the period when they were always on the watch for one or the other of the specialists employed about the place; always lying in wait for them, and dashing out at them with questions, reproach, or reminders. and certainly in the distance the gray figure had looked like peters.yet now, as she reviewed the rapid scene, she felt her husband's explanation of it to have been invalidated by the look of anxiety on his face. why had the familiar appearance of peters made him anxious? why, above all, if it was of such prime necessity to confer with that authority on the subject of the stable-drains, had the failure to find him produced such a look of relief? mary could not say that any one of these considerations had occurred to her at the time, yet, from the promptness with which they now marshaled themselves at her summons, she had a sudden sense that they must all along have been there, waiting their hour.iiweary with her thoughts, she moved toward the window. the library was now completely dark, and she was surprised to see how much faint light the outer world still held.as she peered out into it across the court, a figure shaped itself in the tapering perspective of bare lines: it looked a mere blot of deeper gray in the grayness, and for an instant, as it moved toward her, her heart thumped to the thought, "it's the ghost!"she had time, in that long instant, to feel suddenly that the man of whom, two months earlier, she had a brief distant vision from the roof was now, at his predestined hour, about to reveal himself as not having been peters; and her spirit sank under the impending fear of the disclosure. but almost with the next tick of the clock the ambiguous figure, gaining substance and character, showed itself even to her weak sight as her husband's; and she turned away to meet him, as he entered, with the confession of her folly."it's really too absurd," she laughed out from the threshold, "but i never can remember!""remember what?" boyne questioned as they drew together."that when one sees the lyng ghost one never knows it."her hand was on his sleeve, and he kept it there, but with no response in his gesture or in the lines of his fagged, preoccupied face."did you think you'd seen it?" he asked, after an appreciable interval."why, i actually took you for it, my dear, in my mad determination to spot it!""me -- just now?" his arm dropped away, and he turned from her with a faint echo of her laugh. "really, dearest, you'd better give it up, if that's the best you can do.""yes, i give it up -- i give it up. have you?" she asked, turning round on him abruptly.the parlor-maid had entered with letters and a lamp, and the light struck up into boyne's face as he bent above the tray she presented."have you?" mary perversely insisted, when the servant had disappeared on her errand of illumination."have i what?" he rejoined absently, the light bringing out the sharp stamp of worry between his brows as he turned over the letters."given up trying to see the ghost." her heart beat a little at the experiment she was making.her husband, laying his letters aside, moved away into the shadow of the hearth."i never tried," he said, tearing open the wrapper of a newspaper."well, of course," mary persisted, "the exasperating thing is that there's no use trying, since one can't be sure till so long afterward."he was unfolding the paper as if he had hardly heard her; but after a pause, during which the sheets rustled spasmodically between his hands, he lifted his head to say abruptly, "have you any idea how long?"mary had sunk into a low chair beside the fireplace. from her seat she looked up, startled, at her husband's profile, which was darkly projected against the circle of lamplight."no; none. have you?" she retorted, repeating her former phrase with an added keenness of intention.boyne crumpled the paper into a bunch, and then inconsequently turned back with it toward the lamp."lord, no! i only meant," he explained, with a faint tinge of impatience, "is there any legend, any tradition, as to that?""not that i know of," she answered; but the impulse to add, "what makes you ask?" was checked by the reappearance of the parlor maid with tea and a second lamp.with the dispersal of shadows, and the repetition of the daily domestic office, mary boyne felt herself less oppressed by that sense of something mutely imminent which had darkened her solitary afternoon. for a few moments she gave herself silently to the details of her task, and when she looked up from it she was struck to the point of bewilderment by the change in her husband's face. he had seated himself near the farther lamp, and was absorbed in the perusal of his letters; but was it something he had found in them, or merely the shifting of her own point of view, that had restored his features to their normal aspect? the longer she looked, the more definitely the change affirmed itself. the lines of painful tension had vanished, and such traces of fatigue as lingered were of the kind easily attributable to steady mental effort. he glanced up, as if drawn by her gaze, and met her eyes with a smile."i'm dying for my tea, you know; and here's a letter for you," he said.she took the letter he held out in exchange for the cup she proffer him, and, returning to her seat, broke the seal with the languid gesture of the reader whose interests are all inclosed in the circle of one cherished presence.her next conscious motion was that of starting to her feet, the letter falling to them as she rose, while she held out to her husband a long newspaper clipping."ned! what's this? what does it mean?"he had risen at the same instant, almost as if hearing her cry before she uttered it; and for a perceptible space of time he and she studied each other, like adversaries watching for an advantage, across the space between her chair and his desk."what's what? you fairly made me jump!" boyne said at length, moving toward her with a sudden, half-exasperated laugh. the shadow of apprehension was on his face again, not now a look of fixed foreboding, but a shifting vigilance of lips and eyes that gave her the sense of his feeling himself invisibly surrounded.her hand shook so that she could hardly give him the clipping."this article -- from the 'waukesha sentinel' -- that a man named elwell has brought suit against you -- that there was something wrong about the blue star mine. i can't understand more than half."they continued to face each other as she spoke, and to her astonishment, she saw that her words had the almost immediate effect of dissipating the strained watchfulness of his look."oh, that!" he glanced down the printed slip, and then folded it with the gesture of one who handles something harmless and familiar. "what's the matter with you this afternoon, mary? i thought you'd got bad news."she stood before him with her undefinable terror subsiding slowly under the reassuring touch of his composure."you knew about this, then -- it's all right?""certainly i knew about it; and it's all right.""but what is it? i don't understand. what does this man accuse you of?""oh, pretty nearly every crime in the calendar." boyne had tossed the clipping down, and thrown himself comfortably into an arm-chair near the fire. "do you want to hear the story? it's not particularly interesting -- just a squabble over interests in the blue star.""but who is this elwell? i don't know the name.""oh, he's a fellow i put into it -- gave him a hand up. i told you all about him at the time.""i daresay. i must have forgotten." vainly she strained back among her memories. "but if you helped him, why does he make this return?""oh, probably some shyster lawyer got hold of him and talked him over. it's all rather technical and complicated. i thought that kind of thing bored you."his wife felt a sting of compunction. theoretically, she deprecated the american wife's detachment from her husband's professional interests, but in practice she had always found it difficult to fix her attention on boyne's report of the transactions in which his varied interests involved him. besides, she had felt from the first that, in a community where the amenities of living could be obtained only at the cost of efforts as arduous as her husband's professional labors, such brief leisure as they could command should be used as an escape from immediate preoccupations, a flight to the life they always dreamed of living. once or twice, now that this new life had actually drawn its magic circle about them, she had asked herself if she had done right; but hitherto such conjectures had been no more than the retrospective excursions of an active fancy. now, for the first time, it startled her a little to find how little she knew of the material foundation on which her happiness was built.she glanced again at her husband, and was reassured by the composure of his face; yet she felt the need of more definite grounds for her reassurance."but doesn't this suit worry you? why have you never spoken to me about it?"he answered both questions at once: "i didn't speak of it at first because it did worry me -- annoyed me, rather. but it's all ancient history now. your correspondent must have got hold of a back number of the 'sentinel.'"she felt a quick thrill of relief. "you mean it's over? he's lost his case?"there was a just perceptible delay in boyne's reply. "the suit's been withdrawn -- that's all."but she persisted, as if to exonerate herself from the inward charge of being too easily put off. "withdrawn because he saw he had no chance?""oh, he had no chance," boyne answered.she was still struggling with a dimly felt perplexity at the back of her thoughts."how long ago was it withdrawn?"he paused, as if with a slight return of his former uncertainty. "i've just had the news now; but i've been expecting it.""just now -- in one of your letters?""yes; in one of my letters."she made no answer, and was aware only, after a short interval of waiting, that he had risen, and strolling across the room, had placed himself on the sofa at her side. she felt him, as he did so, pass an arm about her, she felt his hand seek hers and clasp it, and turning slowly, drawn by the warmth of his cheek, she met the smiling clearness of his eyes."it's all right -- it's all right?" she questioned, through the flood of her dissolving doubts; and "i give you my word it never was righter!" he laughed back at her, holding her close.iiione of the strangest things she was afterward to recall out of all the next day's incredible strangeness was the sudden and complete recovery of her sense of security.it was in the air when she woke in her low-ceilinged, dusky room; it accompanied her down-stairs to the breakfast-table, flashed out at her from the fire, and re-duplicated itself brightly from the flanks of the urn and the sturdy flutings of the georgian teapot. it was as if, in some roundabout way, all her diffused apprehensions of the previous day, with their moment of sharp concentration about the newspaper article, -- as if this dim questioning of the future, and startled return upon the past,-had between them liquidated the arrears of some haunting moral obligation. if she had indeed been careless of her husband's affairs, it was, her new state seemed to prove, because her faith in him instinctively justified such carelessness; and his right to her faith had overwhelmingly affirmed itself in the very face of menace and suspicion. she had never seen him more untroubled, more naturally and unconsciously in possession of himself, than after the cross-examination to which she had subjected him: it was almost as if he had been aware of her lurking doubts, and had wanted the air cleared as much as she did.it was as clear, thank heaven! as the bright outer light that surprised her almost with a touch of summer when she issued from the house for her daily round of the gardens. she had left boyne at his desk, indulging herself, as she passed the library door, by a last peep at his quiet face, where he bent, pipe in his mouth, above his papers, and now she had her own morning's task to perform. the task involved on such charmed winter days almost as much delighted loitering about the different quarters of her demesne as if spring were already at work on shrubs and borders. there were such inexhaustible possibilities still before her, such opportunities to bring out the latent graces of the old place, without a single irreverent touch of alteration, that the winter months were all too short to plan what spring and autumn executed. and her recovered sense of safety gave, on this particular morning, a peculiar zest to her progress through the sweet, still place. she went first to the kitchen-garden, where the espalier pear-trees drew complicated patterns on the walls, and pigeons were fluttering and preening about the silvery-slated roof of their cot. there was something wrong about the piping of the hothouse, and she was expecting an authority from dorchester, who was to drive out between trains and make a diagnosis of the boiler. but when she dipped into the damp heat of the greenhouses, among the spiced scents and waxy pinks and reds of old-fashioned exotics, -- even the flora of lyng was in the note!-she learned that the great man had not arrived, and the day being too rare to waste in an artificial atmosphere, she came out again and paced slowly along the springy turf of the bowling-green to the gardens behind the house. at their farther end rose a grass terrace, commanding, over the fish-pond and the yew hedges, a view of the long house-front, with its twisted chimney-stacks and the blue shadows of its roof angles, all drenched in the pale gold moisture of the air.seen thus, across the level tracery of the yews, under the suffused, mild light, it sent her, from its open windows and hospitably smoking chimneys, the look of some warm human presence, of a mind slowly ripened on a sunny wall of experience. she had never before had so deep a sense of her intimacy with it, such a conviction that its secrets were all beneficent, kept, as they said to children, "for one's good," so complete a trust in its power to gather up her life and ned's into the harmonious pattern of the long, long story it sat there weaving in the sun.she heard steps behind her, and turned, expecting to see the gardener, accompanied by the engineer from dorchester. but only one figure was in sight, that of a youngish, slightly built man, who, for reasons she could not on the spot have specified, did not remotely resemble her preconceived notion of an authority on hot-house boilers. the new-comer, on seeing her, lifted his hat, and paused with the air of a gentleman -- perhaps a traveler-desirous of having it immediately known that his intrusion is involuntary. the local fame of lyng occasionally attracted the more intelligent sight-seer, and mary half-expected to see the stranger dissemble a camera, or justify his presence by producing it. but he made no gesture of any sort, and after a moment she asked, in a tone responding to the courteous deprecation of his attitude: "is there any one you wish to see?""i came to see mr. boyne," he replied. his intonation, rather than his accent, was faintly american, and mary, at the familiar note, looked at him more closely. the brim of his soft felt hat cast a shade on his face, which, thus obscured, wore to her short-sighted gaze a look of seriousness, as of a person arriving "on business," and civilly but firmly aware of his rights.past experience had made mary equally sensible to such claims; but she was jealous of her husband's morning hours, and doubtful of his having given any one the right to intrude on them."have you an appointment with mr. boyne?" she asked.he hesitated, as if unprepared for the question."not exactly an appointment," he replied."then i'm afraid, this being his working-time, that he can't receive you now. will you give me a message, or come back later?"the visitor, again lifting his hat, briefly replied that he would come back later, and walked away, as if to regain the front of the house. as his figure receded down the walk between the yew hedges, mary saw him pause and look up an instant at the peaceful house-front bathed in faint winter sunshine; and it struck her, with a tardy touch of compunction, that it would have been more humane to ask if he had come from a distance, and to offer, in that case, to inquire if her husband could receive him. but as the thought occurred to her he passed out of sight behind a pyramidal yew, and at the same moment her attention was distracted by the approach of the gardener, attended by the bearded pepper-and-salt figure of the boiler-maker from dorchester.the encounter with this authority led to such far-reaching issues that they resulted in his finding it expedient to ignore his train, and beguiled mary into spending the remainder of the morning in absorbed confabulation among the greenhouses. she was startled to find, when the colloquy ended, that it was nearly luncheon-time, and she half expected, as she hurried back to the house, to see her husband coming out to meet her. but she found no one in the court but an under-gardener raking the gravel, and the hall, when she entered it, was so silent that she guessed boyne to be still at work behind the closed door of the library.not wishing to disturb him, she turned into the drawing-room, and there, at her writing-table, lost herself in renewed calculations of the outlay to which the morning's conference had committed her. the knowledge that she could permit herself such follies had not yet lost its novelty; and somehow, in contrast to the vague apprehensions of the previous days, it now seemed an element of her recovered security, of the sense that, as ned had said, things in general had never been "righter."she was still luxuriating in a lavish play of figures when the parlor-maid, from the threshold, roused her with a dubiously worded inquiry as to the expediency of serving luncheon. it was one of their jokes that trimmle announced luncheon as if she were divulging a state secret, and mary, intent upon her papers, merely murmured an absent-minded assent.she felt trimmle wavering expressively on the threshold as if in rebuke of such offhand acquiescence; then her retreating steps sounded down the passage, and mary, pushing away her papers, crossed the hall, and went to the library door. it was still closed, and she wavered in her turn, disliking to disturb her husband, yet anxious that he should not exceed his normal measure of work. as she stood there, balancing her impulses, the esoteric trimmle returned with the announcement of luncheon, and mary, thus impelled, opened the door and went into the library.boyne was not at his desk, and she peered about her, expecting to discover him at the book-shelves, somewhere down the length of the room; but her call brought no response, and gradually it became clear to her that he was not in the library.she turned back to the parlor-maid."mr. boyne must be up-stairs. please tell him that luncheon is ready."the parlor-maid appeared to hesitate between the obvious duty of obeying orders and an equally obvious conviction of the foolishness of the injunction laid upon her. the struggle resulted in her saying doubtfully, "if you please, madam, mr. boyne's not up-stairs.""not in his room? are you sure?""i'm sure, madam."mary consulted the clock. "where is he, then?""he's gone out," trimmle announced, with the superior air of one who has respectfully waited for the question that a well-ordered mind would have first propounded.mary's previous conjecture had been right, then. boyne must have gone to the gardens to meet her, and since she had missed him, it was clear that he had taken the shorter way by the south door, instead of going round to the court. she crossed the hall to the glass portal opening directly on the yew garden, but the parlor maid, after another moment of inner conflict, decided to bring out recklessly, "please, madam, mr. boyne didn't go that way."mary turned back. "where did he go? and when?""he went out of the front door, up the drive, madam." it was a matter of principle with trimmle never to answer more than one question at a time."up the drive? at this hour?" mary went to the door herself, and glanced across the court through the long tunnel of bare limes. but its perspective was as empty as when she had scanned it on entering the house."did mr. boyne leave no message?" she asked.trimmle seemed to surrender herself to a last struggle with the forces of chaos."no, madam. he just went out with the gentleman.""the gentleman? what gentleman?" mary wheeled about, as if to front this new factor."the gentleman who called, madam," said trimmle, resignedly."when did a gentleman call? do explain yourself, trimmle!"only the fact that mary was very hungry, and that she wanted to consult her husband about the greenhouses, would have caused her to lay so unusual an injunction on her attendant; and even now she was detached enough to note in trimmle's eye the dawning defiance of the respectful subordinate who has been pressed too hard."i couldn't exactly say the hour, madam, because i didn't let the gentleman in," she replied, with the air of magnanimously ignoring the irregularity of her mistress's course."you didn't let him in?""no, madam. when the bell rang i was dressing, and agnes--""go and ask agnes, then," mary interjected. trimmle still wore her look of patient magnanimity. "agnes would not know, madam, for she had unfortunately burnt her hand in trying the wick of the new lamp from town--" trimmle, as mary was aware, had always been opposed to the new lamp--" and so mrs. dockett sent the kitchen-maid instead."mary looked again at the clock. "it's after two! go and ask the kitchen-maid if mr. boyne left any word."she went into luncheon without waiting, and trimmle presently brought her there the kitchen-maid's statement that the gentleman had called about one o'clock, that mr. boyne had gone out with him without leaving any message. the kitchen-maid did not even know the caller's name, for he had written it on a slip of paper, which he had folded and handed to her, with the injunction to deliver it at once to mr. boyne.mary finished her luncheon, still wondering, and when it was over, and trimmle had brought the coffee to the drawing-room, her wonder had deepened to a first faint tinge of disquietude. it was unlike boyne to absent himself without explanation at so unwonted an hour, and the difficulty of identifying the visitor whose summons he had apparently obeyed made his disappearance the more unaccountable. mary boyne's experience as the wife of a busy engineer, subject to sudden calls and compelled to keep irregular hours, had trained her to the philosophic acceptance of surprises; but since boyne's withdrawal from business he had adopted a benedictine regularity of life. as if to make up for the dispersed and agitated years, with their "stand-up" lunches and dinners rattled down to the joltings of the dining-car, he cultivated the last refinements of punctuality and monotony, discouraging his wife's fancy for the unexpected; and declaring that to a delicate taste there were infinite gradations of pleasure in the fixed recurrences of habit.still, since no life can completely defend itself from the unforeseen, it was evident that all boyne's precautions would sooner or later prove unavailable, and mary concluded that he had cut short a tiresome visit by walking with his caller to the station, or at least accompanying him for part of the way.this conclusion relieved her from farther preoccupation, and she went out herself to take up her conference with the gardener. thence she walked to the village post-office, a mile or so away; and when she turned toward home, the early twilight was setting in.she had taken a foot-path across the downs, and as boyne, meanwhile, had probably returned from the station by the highroad, there was little likelihood of their meeting on the way. she felt sure, however, of his having reached the house before her; so sure that, when she entered it herself, without even pausing to inquire of trimmle, she made directly for the library. but the library was still empty, and with an unwonted precision of visual memory she immediately observed that the papers on her husband's desk lay precisely as they had lain when she had gone in to call him to luncheon.then of a sudden she was seized by a vague dread of the unknown. she had closed the door behind her on entering, and as she stood alone in the long, silent, shadowy room, her dread seemed to take shape and sound, to be there audibly breathing and lurking among the shadows. her short-sighted eyes strained through them, half discerning an actual presence, something aloof, that watched and knew; and in the recoil from that intangible propinquity she threw herself suddenly on the bell-rope and gave it a desperate pull.the long, quavering summons brought trimmle in precipitately with a lamp, and mary breathed again at this sobering reappearance of the usual."you may bring tea if mr. boyne is in," she said, to justify her ring."very well, madam. but mr. boyne is not in," said trimmle, putting down the lamp."not in? you mean he's come back and gone out again?""no, madam. he's never been back."the dread stirred again, and mary knew that now it had her fast."not since he went out with -- the gentleman?""not since he went out with the gentleman.""but who was the gentleman?" mary gasped out, with the sharp note of some one trying to be heard through a confusion of meaningless noises."that i couldn't say, madam." trimmle, standing there by the lamp, seemed suddenly to grow less round and rosy, as though eclipsed by the same creeping shade of apprehension."but the kitchen-maid knows -- wasn't it the kitchen-maid who let him in?""she doesn't know either, madam, for he wrote his name on a folded paper."mary, through her agitation, was aware that they were both designating the unknown visitor by a vague pronoun, instead of the conventional formula which, till then, had kept their allusions within the bounds of custom. and at the same moment her mind caught at the suggestion of the folded paper."but he must have a name! where is the paper?"she moved to the desk, and began to turn over the scattered documents that littered it. the first that caught her eye was an unfinished letter in her husband's hand, with his pen lying across it, as though dropped there at a sudden summons."my dear parvis," --who was parvis?--"i have just received your letter announcing elwell's death, and while i suppose there is now no farther risk of trouble, it might be safer--"she tossed the sheet aside, and continued her search; but no folded paper was discoverable among the letters and pages of manuscript which had been swept together in a promiscuous heap, as if by a hurried or a startled gesture."but the kitchen-maid saw him. send her here," she commanded, wondering at her dullness in not thinking sooner of so simple a solution.trimmle, at the behest, vanished in a flash, as if thankful to be out of the room, and when she reappeared, conducting the agitated underling, mary had regained her self-possession, and had her questions pat.the gentleman was a stranger, yes--that she understood. but what had he said? and, above all, what had he looked like? the first question was easily enough answered, for the disconcerting reason that he had said so little--had merely asked for mr. boyne, and, scribbling something on a bit of paper, had requested that it should at once be carried in to him."then you don't know what he wrote? you're not sure it was his name?"the kitchen-maid was not sure, but supposed it was, since he had written it in answer to her inquiry as to whom she should announce."and when you carried the paper in to mr. boyne, what did he say?"the kitchen-maid did not think that mr. boyne had said anything, but she could not be sure, for just as she had handed him the paper and he was opening it, she had become aware that the visitor had followed her into the library, and she had slipped out, leaving the two gentlemen together."but then, if you left them in the library, how do you know that they went out of the house?"this question plunged the witness into momentary inarticulateness, from which she was rescued by trimmle, who, by means of ingenious circumlocutions, elicited the statement that before she could cross the hall to the back passage she had heard the gentlemen behind her, and had seen them go out of the front door together."then, if you saw the gentleman twice, you must be able to tell me what he looked like."but with this final challenge to her powers of expression it became clear that the limit of the kitchen-maid's endurance had been reached. the obligation of going to the front door to "show in" a visitor was in itself so subversive of the fundamental order of things that it had thrown her faculties into hopeless disarray, and she could only stammer out, after various panting efforts at evocation, "his hat, mum, was different-like, as you might say--""different? how different?" mary flashed out at her, her own mind, in the same instant, leaping back to an image left on it that morning, but temporarily lost under layers of subsequent impressions."his hat had a wide brim, you mean? and his face was pale--a youngish face?" mary pressed her, with a white-lipped intensity of interrogation. but if the kitchen-maid found any adequate answer to this challenge, it was swept away for her listener down the rushing current of her own convictions. the stranger--the stranger in the garden! why had mary not thought of him before? she needed no one now to tell her that it was he who had called for her husband and gone away with him. but who was he, and why had boyne obeyed his call?ivit leaped out at her suddenly, like a grin out of the dark, that they had often called england so little--"such a confoundedly hard place to get lost in."a confoundedly hard place to get lost in! that had been her husband's phrase. and now, with the whole machinery of official investigation sweeping its flash-lights from shore to shore, and across the dividing straits; now, with boyne's name blazing from the walls of every town and village, his portrait how that wrung her! hawked up and down the country like the image of a hunted criminal; now the little compact, populous island, so policed, surveyed, and administered, revealed itself as a sphinx-like guardian of abysmal mysteries, staring back into his wife's anguished eyes as if with the malicious joy of knowing something they would never know!in the fortnight since boyne's disappearance there had been no word of him, no trace of his movements. even the usual misleading reports that raise expectancy in tortured bosoms had been few and fleeting. no one but the bewildered kitchen-maid had seen him leave the house, and no one else had seen "the gentleman" who accompanied him. all inquiries in the neighborhood failed to elicit the memory of a stranger's presence that day in the neighborhood of lyng. and no one had met edward boyne, either alone or in company, in any of the neighboring villages, or on the road across the downs, or at either of the local railway-stations. the sunny english noon had swallowed him as completely as if he had gone out into cimmerian night.mary, while every external means of investigation was working at its highest pressure, had ransacked her husband's papers for any trace of antecedent complications, of entanglements or obligations unknown to her, that might throw a faint ray into the darkness. but if any such had existed in the background of boyne's life, they had disappeared as completely as the slip of paper on which the visitor had written his name. there remained no possible thread of guidance except -- if it were indeed an exception -- the letter which boyne had apparently been in the act of writing when he received his mysterious summons. that letter, read and reread by his wife, and submitted by her to the police, yielded little enough for conjecture to feed on."i have just heard of elwell's death, and while i suppose there is now no farther risk of trouble, it might be safer--" that was all. the "risk of trouble" was easily explained by the newspaper clipping which had apprised mary of the suit brought against her husband by one of his associates in the blue star enterprise. the only new information conveyed in the letter was the fact of its showing boyne, when he wrote it, to be still apprehensive of the results of the suit, though he had assured his wife that it had been withdrawn, and though the letter itself declared that the plaintiff was dead. it took several weeks of exhaustive cabling to fix the identity of the "parvis" to whom the fragmentary communication was addressed, but even after these inquiries had shown him to be a waukesha lawyer, no new facts concerning the elwell suit were elicited. he appeared to have had no direct concern in it, but to have been conversant with the facts merely as an acquaintance, and possible intermediary; and he declared himself unable to divine with what object boyne intended to seek his assistance.this negative information, sole fruit of the first fortnight's feverish search, was not increased by a jot during the slow weeks that followed. mary knew that the investigations were still being carried on, but she had a vague sense of their gradually slackening, as the actual march of time seemed to slacken. it was as though the days, flying horror-struck from the shrouded image of the one inscrutable day, gained assurance as the distance lengthened, till at last they fell back into their normal gait. and so with the human imaginations at work on the dark event. no doubt it occupied them still, but week by week and hour by hour it grew less absorbing, took up less space, was slowly but inevitably crowded out of the foreground of consciousness by the new problems perpetually bubbling up from the vaporous caldron of human experience.even mary boyne's consciousness gradually felt the same lowering of velocity. it still swayed with the incessant oscillations of conjecture; but they were slower, more rhythmical in their beat. there were moments of overwhelming lassitude when, like the victim of some poison which leaves the brain clear, but holds the body motionless, she saw herself domesticated with the horror, accepting its perpetual presence as one of the fixed conditions of life.these moments lengthened into hours and days, till she passed into a phase of stolid acquiescence. she watched the familiar routine of life with the incurious eye of a savage on whom the meaningless processes of civilization make but the faintest impression. she had come to regard herself as part of the routine, a spoke of the wheel, revolving with its motion; she felt almost like the furniture of the room in which she sat, an insensate object to be dusted and pushed about with the chairs and tables. and this deepening apathy held her fast at lyng, in spite of the urgent entreaties of friends and the usual medical recommendation of "change." her friends supposed that her refusal to move was inspired by the belief that her husband would one day return to the spot from which he had vanished, and a beautiful legend grew up about this imaginary state of waiting. but in reality she had no such belief: the depths of anguish inclosing her were no longer lighted by flashes of hope. she was sure that boyne would never come back, that he had gone out of her sight as completely as if death itself had waited that day on the threshold. she had even renounced, one by one, the various theories as to his disappearance which had been advanced by the press, the police, and her own agonized imagination. in sheer lassitude her mind turned from these alternatives of horror, and sank back into the blank fact that he was gone.no, she would never know what had become of him -- no one would ever know. but the house knew; the library in which she spent her long, lonely evenings knew. for it was here that the last scene had been enacted, here that the stranger had come, and spoken the word which had caused boyne to rise and follow him. the floor she trod had felt his tread; the books on the shelves had seen his face; and there were moments when the intense consciousness of the old, dusky walls seemed about to break out into some audible revelation of their secret. but the revelation never came, and she knew it would never come. lyng was not one of the garrulous old houses that betray the secrets intrusted to them. its very legend proved that it had always been the mute accomplice, the incorruptible custodian of the mysteries it had surprised. and mary boyne, sitting face to face with its portentous silence, felt the futility of seeking to break it by any human means.v"i don't say it wasn't straight, yet don't say it was straight. it was business."mary, at the words, lifted her head with a start, and looked intently at the speaker.when, half an hour before, a card with "mr. parvis" on it had been brought up to her, she had been immediately aware that the name had been a part of her consciousness ever since she had read it at the head of boyne's unfinished letter. in the library she had found awaiting her a small neutral-tinted man with a bald head and gold eye-glasses, and it sent a strange tremor through her to know that this was the person to whom her husband's last known thought had been directed.parvis, civilly, but without vain preamble,--in the manner of a man who has his watch in his hand,--had set forth the object of his visit. he had "run over" to england on business, and finding himself in the neighborhood of dorchester, had not wished to leave it without paying his respects to mrs. boyne; without asking her, if the occasion offered, what she meant to do about bob elwell's family.the words touched the spring of some obscure dread in mary's bosom. did her visitor, after all, know what boyne had meant by his unfinished phrase? she asked for an elucidation of his question, and noticed at once that he seemed surprised at her continued ignorance of the subject. was it possible that she really knew as little as she said?"i know nothing -- you must tell me," she faltered out; and her visitor thereupon proceeded to unfold his story. it threw, even to her confused perceptions, and imperfectly initiated vision, a lurid glare on the whole hazy episode of the blue star mine. her husband had made his money in that brilliant speculation at the cost of "getting ahead" of some one less alert to seize the chance; the victim of his ingenuity was young robert elwell, who had "put him on" to the blue star scheme.parvis, at mary's first startled cry, had thrown her a sobering glance through his impartial glasses."bob elwell wasn't smart enough, that's all; if he had been, he might have turned round and served boyne the same way. it's the kind of thing that happens every day in business. i guess it's what the scientists call the survival of the fittest," said mr. parvis, evidently pleased with the aptness of his analogy.mary felt a physical shrinking from the next question she tried to frame; it was as though the words on her lips had a taste that nauseated her."but then--you accuse my husband of doing something dishonorable?"mr. parvis surveyed the question dispassionately. "oh, no, i don't. i don't even say it wasn't straight." he glanced up and down the long lines of books, as if one of them might have supplied him with the definition he sought. "i don't say it wasn't straight, and yet i don't say it was straight. it was business." after all, no definition in his category could be more comprehensive than that.mary sat staring at him with a look of terror. he seemed to her like the indifferent, implacable emissary of some dark, formless power."but mr. elwell's lawyers apparently did not take your view, since i suppose the suit was withdrawn by their advice.""oh, yes, they knew he hadn't a leg to stand on, technically. it was when they advised him to withdraw the suit that he got desperate. you see, he'd borrowed most of the money he lost in the blue star, and he was up a tree. that's why he shot himself when they told him he had no show."the horror was sweeping over mary in great, deafening waves."he shot himself? he killed himself because of that? ""well, he didn't kill himself, exactly. he dragged on two months before he died." parvis emitted the statement as unemotionally as a gramophone grinding out its "record.""you mean that he tried to kill himself, and failed? and tried again?""oh, he didn't have to try again," said parvis, grimly.they sat opposite each other in silence, he swinging his eyeglass thoughtfully about his finger, she, motionless, her arms stretched along her knees in an attitude of rigid tension."but if you knew all this," she began at length, hardly able to force her voice above a whisper, "how is it that when i wrote you at the time of my husband's disappearance you said you didn't understand his letter?"parvis received this without perceptible discomfiture. "why, i didn't understand it -- strictly speaking. and it wasn't the time to talk about it, if i had. the elwell business was settled when the suit was withdrawn. nothing i could have told you would have helped you to find your husband."mary continued to scrutinize him. "then why are you telling me now?"still parvis did not hesitate. "well, to begin with, i supposed you knew more than you appear to -- i mean about the circumstances of elwell's death. and then people are talking of it now; the whole matter's been raked up again. and i thought, if you didn't know, you ought to."she remained silent, and he continued: "you see, it's only come out lately what a bad state elwell's affairs were in. his wife's a proud woman, and she fought on as long as she could, going out to work, and taking sewing at home, when she got too sick-something with the heart, i believe. but she had his bedridden mother to look after, and the children, and she broke down under it, and finally had to ask for help. that attracted attention to the case, and the papers took it up, and a subscription was started. everybody out there liked bob elwell, and most of the prominent names in the place are down on the list, and people began to wonder why--"parvis broke off to fumble in an inner pocket. "here," he continued, "here's an account of the whole thing from the 'sentinel'--a little sensational, of course. but i guess you'd better look it over."he held out a newspaper to mary, who unfolded it slowly, remembering, as she did so, the evening when, in that same room, the perusal of a clipping from the "sentinel" had first shaken the depths of her security.as she opened the paper, her eyes, shrinking from the glaring head-lines, "widow of boyne's victim forced to appeal for aid," ran down the column of text to two portraits inserted in it. the first was her husband's, taken from a photograph made the year they had come to england. it was the picture of him that she liked best, the one that stood on the writing-table up-stairs in her bedroom. as the eyes in the photograph met hers, she felt it would be impossible to read what was said of him, and closed her lids with the sharpness of the pain."i thought if you felt disposed to put your name down--" she heard parvis continue.she opened her eyes with an effort, and they fell on the other portrait. it was that of a youngish man, slightly built, in rough clothes, with features somewhat blurred by the shadow of a projecting hat-brim. where had she seen that outline before? she stared at it confusedly, her heart hammering in her throat and ears. then she gave a cry."this is the man--the man who came for my husband!"she heard parvis start to his feet, and was dimly aware that she had slipped backward into the corner of the sofa, and that he was bending above her in alarm. with an intense effort she straightened herself, and reached out for the paper, which she had dropped."it's the man! i should know him anywhere!" she cried in a voice that sounded in her own ears like a scream.parvis's voice seemed to come to her from far off, down endless, fog-muffled windings."mrs. boyne, you're not very well. shall i call somebody? shall i get a glass of water?""no, no, no!" she threw herself toward him, her hand frantically clenching the newspaper. "i tell you, it's the man! i know him! he spoke to me in the garden!"parvis took the journal from her, directing his glasses to the portrait. "it can't be, mrs. boyne. it's robert elwell.""robert elwell?" her white stare seemed to travel into space. "then it was robert elwell who came for him.""came for boyne? the day he went away?" parvis's voice dropped as hers rose. he bent over, laying a fraternal hand on her, as if to coax her gently back into her seat. "why, elwell was dead! don't you remember?"mary sat with her eyes fixed on the picture, unconscious of what he was saying."don't you remember boyne's unfinished letter to me -- the one you found on his desk that day? it was written just after he'd heard of elwell's death." she noticed an odd shake in parvis's unemotional voice. "surely you remember that!" he urged her.yes, she remembered: that was the profoundest horror of it. elwell had died the day before her husband's disappearance; and this was elwell's portrait; and it was the portrait of the man who had spoken to her in the garden. she lifted her head and looked slowly about the library. the library could have borne witness that it was also the portrait of the man who had come in that day to call boyne from his unfinished letter. through the misty surgings of her brain she heard the faint boom of half-forgotten words -- words spoken by alida stair on the lawn at pangbourne before boyne and his wife had ever seen the house at lyng, or had imagined that they might one day live there."this was the man who spoke to me," she repeated.she looked again at parvis. he was trying to conceal his disturbance under what he imagined to be an expression of indulgent commiseration; but the edges of his lips were blue. "he thinks me mad; but i'm not mad," she reflected; and suddenly there flashed upon her a way of justifying her strange affirmation.she sat quiet, controlling the quiver of her lips, and waiting till she could trust her voice to keep its habitual level; then she said, looking straight at parvis: "will you answer me one question, please? when was it that robert elwell tried to kill himself?""when--when?" parvis stammered."yes; the date. please try to remember."she saw that he was growing still more afraid of her. "i have a reason," she insisted gently."yes, yes. only i can't remember. about two months before, i should say.""i want the date," she repeated.parvis picked up the newspaper. "we might see here," he said, still humoring her. he ran his eyes down the page. "here it is. last october--the--"she caught the words from him. "the 20th, wasn't it?" with a sharp look at her, he verified. "yes, the 20th. then you did know?""i know now." her white stare continued to travel past him. "sunday, the 20th--that was the day he came first."parvis's voice was almost inaudible. "came here first?""yes.""you saw him twice, then?""yes, twice." she breathed it at him with dilated eyes. "he came first on the 20th of october. i remember the date because it was the day we went up meldon steep for the first time." she felt a faint gasp of inward laughter at the thought that but for that she might have forgotten.parvis continued to scrutinize her, as if trying to intercept her gaze."we saw him from the roof," she went on. "he came down the lime avenue toward the house. he was dressed just as he is in that picture. my husband saw him first. he was frightened, and ran down ahead of me; but there was no one there. he had vanished.""elwell had vanished?" parvis faltered."yes." their two whispers seemed to grope for each other. "i couldn't think what had happened. i see now. he tried to come then; but he wasn't dead enough--he couldn't reach us. he had to wait for two months; and then he came back again--and ned went with him."she nodded at parvis with the look of triumph of a child who has successfully worked out a difficult puzzle. but suddenly she lifted her hands with a desperate gesture, pressing them to her bursting temples."oh, my god! i sent him to ned--i told him where to go! i sent him to this room!" she screamed out.she felt the walls of the room rush toward her, like inward falling ruins; and she heard parvis, a long way off, as if through the ruins, crying to her, and struggling to get at her. but she was numb to his touch, she did not know what he was saying. through the tumult she heard but one clear note, the voice of alida stair, speaking on the lawn at pangbourne."you won't know till afterward," it said. "you won't know till long, long afterward."itheir railway carriage had been full when the train left bologna; but at the first station beyond milan their only remaining companion a courtly person who ate garlic out of a carpetbag had left his crumb-strewn seat with a bow.lydia's eye regretfully followed the shiny broadcloth of his retreating back till it lost itself in the cloud of touts and cab drivers hanging about the station; then she glanced across at gannett and caught the same regret in his look. they were both sorry to be alone."par-ten-za!" shouted the guard. the train vibrated to a sudden slamming of doors; a waiter ran along the platform with a tray of fossilized sandwiches; a belated porter flung a bundle of shawls and band-boxes into a third-class carriage; the guard snapped out a brief partenza! which indicated the purely ornamental nature of his first shout; and the train swung out of the station.the direction of the road had changed, and a shaft of sunlight struck across the dusty red velvet seats into lydia's corner. gannett did not notice it. he had returned to his revue de paris, and she had to rise and lower the shade of the farther window. against the vast horizon of their leisure such incidents stood out sharply.having lowered the shade, lydia sat down, leaving the length of the carriage between herself and gannett. at length he missed her and looked up.i moved out of the sun," she hastily explained.he looked at her curiously: the sun was beating on her through the shade."very well," he said pleasantly; adding, "you don't mind?" as he drew a cigarette case from his pocket.it was a refreshing touch, relieving the tension of her spirit with the suggestion that, after all, if he could smoke! the relief was only momentary. her experience of smokers was limited (her husband had disapproved of the use of tobacco) but she knew from hearsay that men sometimes smoked to get away from things; that a cigar might be the masculine equivalent of darkened windows and a headache. gannett, after a puff or two, returned to his review.it was just as she had foreseen; he feared to speak as much as she did. it was one of the misfortunes of their situation that they were never busy enough to necessitate, or even to justify, the postponement of unpleasant discussions. if they avoided a question it was disagreeable. they had unlimited leisure and an accumulation of mental energy to devote to any subject that presented itself; new topics were in fact at a premium. lydia sometimes had premonitions of a famine-stricken period when there would be nothing left to talk about, and she had already caught herself doling out piecemeal what, in the first prodigality of their confidences, she would have flung to him in a breath. their silence therefore might simply mean that they had nothing to say; but it was another disadvantage of their position that it allowed infinite opportunity for the classification of minute differences. lydia had learned to distinguish between real and factitious silences; and under gannett's she now detected a hum of speech to which her own thoughts made breathless answer.how could it be otherwise, with that thing between them? she glanced up at the rack overhead. the thing was there, in her dressing bag, symbolically suspended over her head and his. he was thinking of it now, just as she was; they had been thinking of it in unison ever since they had entered the train. while the carriage had held other travelers they had screened her from his thought; but now that he and she were alone she knew exactly what was passing through his mind; she could almost hear him asking himself what he should say to her.the thing had come that morning, brought up to her in an innocent-looking envelope with the rest of their letters, as they were leaving the hotel at bologna. as she tore it open, she and gannett were laughing over some ineptitude of the local guidebook they had been driven, of late, to make the most of such incidental humors of travel. even when she had unfolded the document she took it for some unimportant business paper sent abroad for her signature, and her eye traveled inattentively over the curly whereases of the preamble until a word arrested her: divorce. there it stood, an impassable barrier, between her husband's name and hers.she had been prepared for it, of course, as healthy people are said to be prepared for death, in the sense of knowing it must come without in the least expecting that it will. she had known from the first that tillotson meant to divorce her but what did it matter? nothing mattered, in those first days of supreme deliverance, but the fact that she was free; and not so much (she had begun to be aware) that freedom had released her from tillotson as that it had given her to gannett. this discovery had not been agreeable to her self-esteem. she had preferred to think that tillotson had himself embodied all her reasons for leaving him; and those he represented had seemed cogent enough to stand in no need of reinforcement. yet she had not left him till she met gannett. it was her love for gannett that had made life with tillotson so poor and incomplete a business. if she had never, from the first, regarded her marriage as a full cancelling of her claims upon life, she had at least, for a number of years, accepted it as a provisional compensation, she had made it "do." existence in the commodious tillotson mansion in fifth avenue with mrs. tillotson senior commanding the approaches from the second-story front windows had been reduced to a series of purely automatic acts. the moral atmosphere of the tillotson interior was as carefully screened and curtained as the house itself: mrs. tillotson senior dreaded ideas as much as a draft in her back. prudent people liked an even temperature; and to do anything unexpected was as foolish as going out in the rain. one of the chief advantages of being rich was that one need not be exposed to unforeseen contingencies: by the use of ordinary firmness and common sense one could make sure of doing exactly the same thing every day at the same hour. these doctrines, reverentially imbibed with his mother's milk, tillotson (a model son who had never given his parents an hour's anxiety) complacently expounded to his wife, testifying to his sense of their importance by the regularity with which he wore galoshes on damp days, his punctuality at meals, and his elaborate precautions against burglars and contagious diseases. lydia, coming from a smaller town, and entering new york life through the portals of the tillotson mansion, had mechanically accepted this point of view as inseparable from having a front pew in church and a parterre box at the opera. all the people who came to the house revolved in the same small circle of predjudices. it was the kind of society in which, after dinner, the ladies compared the exorbitant charges of thier children's teachers, and agreed that, even with the new duties on french clothes, it was cheaper in the end to get everything from worth; while the husbands, over their cigars, lamented municipal corruption, and decided that the men to start a reform were those who had no private interests at stake.to lydia this view of life had become a matter of course, just as lumbering about in her mother-in-law's locomotion, and listening every sunday to fashionable presbyterian divine the inevitable atonement for having thought oneself bored on the other six days of the week. before she met gannett her life had seemed merely dull; his coming made it appear like one of those dismal cruikshank prints in which the people are all ugly and all engaged in occupations that are either vulgar or stupid.it was natural that tillotson should be the chief sufferer from this readjustment of focus. gannett's nearness had made her husband ridiculous, and a part of the ridicule had been reflected on herself. her tolerance laid her open to a suspicion of obtuseness from which she must, at all costs, clear herself in gannett's eyes.she did not understand this until afterwards. at the time she fancied that she had merely reached the limits of endurance. in so large a charter of liberties as the mere act of leaving tillotson seemed to confer, the small question of divorce or no divorce did not count. it was when she saw that she had left her husband only to be with gannett that she perceived the significance of anything affecting their relations. her husband, in casting her off, had virtually flung her at gannett: it was thus that the world viewed it. the measure of alacrity with which gannett would receive her would be the subject of curious speculation over afternoon tea tables and in club corners. she knew what would be said she had heard it so often of others! the recollection bathed her in misery. the men would probably back gannett to "do the decent thing"; but the ladies' eyebrows would emphasize the worthlessness of such enforced fidelity; and after all, they would be right. she had put herself in a position where ganett "owed" her something; where, as a gentleman, he was bound to "stand the damage." the idea of accepting such compensation had never crossed her mind; the so-called rehabilitation of such a marriage had always seemed to her the only real disgrace. what she dreaded was the necessity of having to explain herself; of having to combat his arguments; of calculating, in spite of herself, the exact measure of insistence with which he presssed them. she knew not whether she most shrank from his insisting too much or too little. in such a case the nicest sense of proportion might be at fault; and how easily to fall into the error of taking her resistance for a test of his sincerity! whichever way she turned, an ironical implication confronted her: she had the exasperated sense of having walked into the trap of some stupid practical joke.beneath all these preoccupations lurked the dread of what he was thinking. sooner or later, of course, he would have to speak; but that, in the meantime, he should think, even for a moment that there was any use in speaking, seemed to her simply unendurable. her sensitiveness on this point was aggravated by another fear, as yet barely on the level of consciousness; the fear of unwillingly involving gannett in the trammels of her dependence. to look upon him as the instrument of her liberation; to resist in herself the least tendency to a wifely taking possession of his future; had seemed to lydia the one way of maintaining the dignity of their relation. her view had not changed, but she was aware of a growing inability to keep her thoughts fixed on the essential point the point of parting with gannett. it was easy to face as long as she kept it sufficiently far off: but what was this act of mental postponement but a gradual encroachment on his future? what was needful was the courage to recognize the moment when by some word or look, their voluntary fellowship should be transformed into a bondage the more wearing that it was based on none of those common obligations which make the most imperfect marriage in some sort a center of gravity.when the porter, at the next station, threw the door open, lydia drew back, making way for the hoped-for intruder; but none came, and the train took up its leisurely progress through the spring wheat fields and budding copses. she now began to hope that gannett would speak before the next station. she watched him furtively, half-disposed to return to the seat opposite his, but there was an artificiality about his absorption that restrained her. she had never before seen him read with so conspicuous an air of warding off interruption. what could he be thinking of? why should he be afraid to speak? or was it her answer that he dreaded?.the train paused for the passing of an express, and he put down his book and leaned out of the window. presently he turned to her with a smile."there's a jolly old villa out here," he said.his easy tone relieved her, and she smiled back at him as she crossed over to his corner.beyond the embankment, through the opening in a mossy wall, she caught sight of the villa, with its broken balustrades, its stagnant fountains, and the stone satyr closing the perspective of a dusky grass walk."how should you like to live there?" he asked as the train moved on."there?""in some such place, i mean. one might do worse, don't you think so? there must be at least two centuries of solitude under those yew trees. shouldn't you like it?""i don't know," she faltered. she knew now that he meant to speak.he lit another cigarette. "we shall have to live somewhere, you know," he said as he bent above the match.lydia tried to speak carelessly. "je n'en vois pas la necessite! why not live everywhere, as we have been doing?""but we can't travel forever, can we?"oh, forever's a long word," she objected, picking up the review he had thrown aside."for the rest of our lives then," he said, moving nearer.she made a slight gesture which caused his hand to slip from hers."why should we make plans? i thought you agreed with me that it's pleasanter to drift."he looked at her hesitatingly. "it's been pleasant, certainly; but i suppose i shall have to get at my work again some day. you know i haven't written a line since all this time," he hastily amended.she flamed with sympathy and self-reproach. "oh, if you mean that if you want to write of course we must settle down. how stupid of me not to have thought of it sooner! where shall we go? where do you think you could work best? we oughtn't to lose any more time."he hesitated again. "i had thought of a villa in these parts. it's quiet; we shouldn't be bothered. should you like it?""of course i should like it." she paused and looked away. "but i thought i remember your telling me once that your best work had been done in a crowd in big cities. why should you shut yourself up in a desert?"gannett, for a moment, made no reply. at length he said, avoiding her eye as carefully as she avoided his: "it might be different now; i can't tell, of course, till i try. a writer ought not be dependent on his milieu, it's a mistake to humor oneself in that way; and i thought that just at first you might prefer to be."she faced him. "to be what?""well quiet. i mean.""what do you mean by 'at first'?" she interruped.he paused again. "i mean after we are married."she thrust up her chin and turned toward the window. "thank you!" she tossed back at him."lydia!" he exclaimed blankly; and she felt in every fiber of her averted person that he had made the inconceivable, the unpardonable mistake of anticipating her acquiescence.the train rattled on and he groped for a third cigarette. lydia remained silent."i haven't offended you?" he ventured at length, in the tone of a man who feels his way.she shook her head with a sigh. "i thought you understood," she moaned. their eyes met and she moved back to his side."do you want to know how not to offend me? by taking it for granted, once for all, that you've said your say on the odious question and that i've said mine, and that we stand just where we did this morning before that that hateful paper came to spoil everything between us!""to spoil everything between us? what on earth do you mean? aren't you glad to be free?""i was free before.""not to marry me," he suggested.but i don't want to marry you!" she cried.she saw that he turned pale. "i'm obtuse, i suppose," he said slowly. "i confess i don't see what you're driving at. are you tired of the whole business? or was i simply an excuse for getting away? perhaps you didn't care to travel alone? was that it? and now you want to chuck me?" his voice had grown harsh. "you owe me a straight answer, you know; don't be tenderhearted!"her eyes swam as she leaned to him. "don't you see it's because i care because i care so much? oh, ralph! can't you see how it would humiliate me? try to feel it as a woman would! don't you see the misery of being made your wife in this way? if i'd known you as a girl that would have been a real marriage! but now this vulgar fraud upon society and upon a society we despised and laughed at this sneaking back into a position that we've voluntarily foreited: don't you see what a cheap compromise it is? we neither of us believe in the abstract 'sacredness' of marriage; we both know that no ceremony is needed to consecrate our love for each other; what object can we have in marrying, except the secret fear of each that the other may escape, or the secret longing to work our way back graduallyoh, very gradually into the esteem of the people whose conventional morality we have always ridiculed and hated? and the very fact that, after a decent interval, these same people would come and dine with us the women who would let me die in a gutter today because i am 'leading a life of sin doesn't that disgust you more than their turning their backs on us now? i can stand being cut by them, but i couldn't stand their coming to call and asking what i meant to do about visiting that unfortunate mrs. so-and-so!"she paused, and gannett maintained a perplexed silence."you judge things too theoretically," he said at length, slowly. "life is made up of compromises.""the life we ran away from yes! if we had been willing to accept them "she flushed" we might have gone on meeting each other at mrs. tillotson's dinners."he smiled slightly. "i didn't know that we ran away to found a new system of ethics. i supposed it was because we loved each other.""life is complex, of course; isn't it the very recognition of that fact that separates us from the people who see it tout d'une piece? if they are right, if marriage is sacred in itself and the individual must always be sacrificed to the family then there can be no real marriage between us, since our being together is a protest against the sacrifice of the individual to the family." she interrupted herself with a laugh. "you'll say now that i'm giving you a lecture on sociology! of course one acts as one can as one must, perhaps pulled by all sorts of invisible threads; but at least one needn't pretend, for social advantages, to subscribe to a creed that ignores the complexity of human motives that classifies people by arbitrary signs, and puts it in everybody's reach to be on mrs. tillotson's visiting list. it may be necessary that the world should be ruled by conventions but if we believed in them, why did we break through them? and if we don't believe in them, is it honest to take advantage of the protection they afford?"gannett hesitated. "one may believe in them or not; but as long as they do rule the world it is only by taking advantage of their protection that one can find a modus vivendi.""do outlaws need a modus vivendi?"he looked at her hopelessly. nothing is more perplexing to man than the mental process of a woman who reasons her emotions.she thought she had scored a point and followed it up passionately. "you do understand, don't you? you see how the very thought of the thing humiliates me! we are together today because we choose to be don't let us look any farther than that!" she caught his hands. "promise me you'll never speak of it again; promise me you'll never think of it even," she implored, with a tearful prodigality of italics.through what followed his protests, his arguments, his final unconvinced submission to her wishes she had a sense of his but half-discerning all that, for her, had made the moment so tumultuous. they had reached that memorable point in every heart history when, for the first time, the man seems obtuse and the woman irrational. it was the abundance of his intentions that consoled her, on reflection, for what they lacked in quality. after all, it would have been worse, incalculably worse, to have detected any overreadiness to understand her.iiwhen the train at nightfall brought them to their journey's end at the edge of one of the lakes, lydia was glad that they were not, as usual, to pass from one solitude to another. their wanderings during the year had indeed been like the flight of the outlaws: through sicily, dalmatia, translyvania and southern italy they had persisted in their tacit avoidance of their kind. isolation, at first, had deepened the flavor of their happiness, as night intensifies the scent of certain flowers; but in the new phase on which they were entering, lydia's chief wish was that they should be less abnormally exposed to the action of each other's thoughts.she shrank, nevertheless, as the brightly-looming bulk of the fashionable anglo-american hotel on the water's brink began to radiate toward their advancing boat its vivid suggestion of social order, visitors' lists, church services, and the bland inquisition of the table d'hote. the mere fact that in a moment or two she must take her place on the hotel register as mrs. gannett seemed to weaken the springs of her resistance.they had meant to stay for a night only, on their way to a lofty village among the glaciers of monte rosa; but after the first plunge into publicity, when they entered the dining room, lydia felt the relief of being lost in a crowd, of ceasing for a moment to be the center of gannett's scrutiny; and in his face she caught the reflection of her feeling. after dinner, when she went upstairs, he strolled into the smoking room, and an hour or two later, sitting in the darkness of her window, she heard his voice below and saw him walking up and down the terrace with a companion cigar at his side. when he came he told her he had been talking to the hotel chaplain a very good sort of fellow."queer little microcosms, these hotels! most of these people live here all summer and then migrate to italy or the riviera. the english are the only people who can lead that kind of life with dignity those soft-voiced old ladies in shetland shawls somehow carry the british empire under their caps. civis romanus sum. it's a curious study there might be some good things to work up here."he stood before her with the vivid preoccupied stare of the novelist on the trail of a "subject." with a relief that was half painful she noticed that, for the first time since they had been together, he was hardly aware of her presence."do you think you could write here?""here? i don't know." his stare dropped. "after being out of things so long one's first impressions are bound to be tremendously vivid, you know. i see a dozen threads already that one might follow "he broke off with a touch of embarrassment."then follow them. we'll stay," she said with sudden decision."stay here?" he glanced at her in surprise, and then, walking to the window, looked out upon the dusky slumber of the garden."why not?" she said at length, in a tone of veiled irritation."the place is full of old cats in caps who gossip with the chaplain. shall you like i mean, it would be different if "she flamed up."do you suppose i care? it's none of their business.""of course not; but you won't get them to think so.""they may think what they please."he looked at her doubtfully."it's for you to decide.""we'll stay," she repeated.gannett, before they met, had made himself known as a successful writer of short stories and of a novel which had achieved the distinction of being widely discussed. the reviewers called him "promising," and lydia now accused herself of having too long interfered with the fulfillment of his promise. there was a special irony in the fact, since his passionate assurance that only the stimulus of her companionship could bring out his latent faculty had almost given the dignity of a "vocation" to her course: there had been moments when she had felt unable to assume, before posterity, the responsibility of thwarting his career. and, after all, he had not written a line since they had been together: his first desire to write had come from renewed contact with the world! was it all a mistake then? must the most intelligent choice work more disastrously than the blundering combinations of chance? or was there a still more humiliating answer to her perplexities? his sudden imp! ulse of activity so exactly coincided with her own wish to withdraw, for a time, from the range of his observation, that she wondered if he too were not seeking sanctuary from intolerable problems."you must begin tomorrow!" she cried, hiding a tremor under the laugh with which she added, "i wonder if there's any ink in the inkstand?"whatever else they had at the hotel bellosguardo, they had, as miss pinsent said, "a certain tone." it was to lady susan condit that they owed this inestimable benefit; an advantage ranking in miss pinsent's opinion above even the lawn tennis courts and the resident chaplain. it was the fact of lady susan's annual visit that made the hotel what it was. miss pinsent was certainly the last to underrate such a privilege: "it's so important, my dear, forming as we do a little family, that there should be someone to give the tone; and no one could do it better than lady susan an earl's daughter and a person of such determination. dear mrs. ainger now who really ought, you know, when lady susan's away absolutely refuses to assert herself." miss pinsent sniffed derisively. "a bishop's niece! my dear, i saw her once actually give in to some south americans and before us all. she gave up her seat at table to oblige them such a lack of ! dignity! lady susan spoke to her very plainly about it afterwards."miss pinsent glanced across the lake and adjusted her auburn front."but of course i don't deny that the stand lady susan takes is not always easy to live up to for the rest of us, i mean. monsieur grossart, our good proprietor, finds it trying at times, i know he has said as much, privately, to mrs. ainger and me. after all, the poor man is not to blame for wanting to fill his hotel, is he? and lady susan is so difficult so very difficult about new people. one might almost say that she disapproves of them beforehand, on principle. and yet she's had warnings she very nearly made a dreadful mistake once with the duchess of levens, who dyed her hair and well, swore and smoked. one would have thought that might have been a lesson to lady susan." miss pinsent resumed her knitting with a sigh. "there are exceptions, of course. she took at once to you and mr. gannett it was quite remarkable, really. oh, i don't mean that either of course not! it was perfectly natural we all thought you so charming and interesting form the first day we knew at once that mr. gannett was intellectual, by the magazines you took in; but you know what i mean. lady susan is so very well, i won't say prejudiced, as mrs. ainger does but so prepared not to like new people, that her taking to you in that way was a surprise to us all, i confess."miss pinsent sent a significant glance down the long laurustinus alley from the other end of which two people a lady and a gentleman were strolling toward them through the smiling neglect of the garden."in this case, of course, it's very different; that i'm willing to admit. their looks are against them; but, as mrs. ainger says, one can't exactly tell them so.""she's very handsome," lydia ventured, with her eyes on the lady, who showed, under the dome of a vivid sunshade, the hourglass figure and superlative coloring of a christmas chromo."that's the worst of it. she's too handsome.""well, after all, she can't help that.""other people manage to," said miss pinsent skeptically."but isn't it rather unfair of lady susan considering that nothing is known about them?""but my dear, that's the very thing that's against them. it's infinitely worse than any actual knowledge."lydia mentally agreed that, in the case of mrs. linton, it possibly might be."i wonder why they came here?" she mused."that's against them too. it's always a bad sign when loud people come to a quiet place. and they've brought van loads of boxes her maid told mrs. ainger's that they meant to stop indefinitely.""and lady susan actually turned her back on her in the salon?""my dear, she said it was for our sakes; that makes it so unanswerable! but poor grossart is in a way! the lintons have taken his most expressive suite, you know the yellow damask drawing room above the portico and they have champagne with every meal!"they were silent as mr. and mrs. linton sauntered by; the lady with tempestuous brows and challenging chin; the gentleman, a blond stripling, trailing after her, head downward, like a reluctant child dragged by his nurse."what does your husband think of them, my dear?" miss pinsent whispered as they passed out of earshot.lydia stooped to pick a violet in the border."he hasn't told me.""of your speaking to them, i mean. would he approve of that? i know how very particular nice americans are. i think your action might make a difference; it would certainly carry weight with lady susan.""dear miss pinsent, you flatter me!"lydia rose and gathered up her book and sunshade."well, if you're asked for an opinion if lady susan asks you for one i think you ought to be prepared," miss pinsent admonished her as she moved away.iiilady susan held her own. she ignored the lintons, and her little family, as miss pinsent phrased it, followed suit. even mrs. ainger agreed that it was obligatory. if lady susan owed it to the others not to speak to the lintons, the others clearly owed it to lady susan to back her up. it was generally found expedient, at the hotel bellosguardo, to adopt this form of reasoning.whatever effect this combined action may have had upon the lintons, it did not at least have that of driving them away. monsieur grossart, after a few days of suspense, had the satisfaction of seeing them settle down in his yellow damask premier with what looked like a permanent installation of palm trees and silk cushions, and a gratifying continuance in the consumption of champagne. mrs. linton trailed her doucet draperies up and down the garden with the same challenging air, while her husband, smoking innumerable cigarettes, dragged himself dejectedly in her wake; but neither of them, after the first encounter with lady susan, made any attempt to extend their acquaintance. they simply ignored their ignorers. as miss pinsent resentfully observed, they behaved exactly as though the hotel were empty.it was therefore a matter of surprise, as well as of displeasure, to lydia, to find, on glancing up one day from her seat in the garden, that the shadow which had fallen across her book was that of the enigmatic mrs. linton."i want to speak to you," that lady said, in a rich hard voice that seemed the audible expression of her gown and her complexion.lydia started. she certainly did not want to speak to mrs. linton."shall i sit down here?" the latter continued, fixing her intensely-shaded eyes on lydia's face, "or are you afraid of being seen with me?""afraid?" lydia colored. "sit down, please. what is it that you wish to say?"mrs. linton, with a smile, drew up a garden chair and crossed one openwork ankle above the other."i want you to tell me what my husband said to your husband last night."lydia turned pale."my husband to yours?" she faltered, staring at the other."didn't you know they were closeted together for hours in the smoking room after you went upstairs? my man didn't get to bed until nearly two o'clock and when he did i couldn't get a word out of him. when he wants to be aggravating i'll back him against anybody living!" her teeth and eyes flashed persuasively upon lydia. "but you'll tell me what they were talking about, won't you? i know i can trust you you look so awfully kind. and it's for his own good. he's such a precious donkey and i'm so afraid he's got into some beastly scrape or other. if he'd only trust his own old woman! but they're always writing to him and setting him against me. and i've got nobody to turn to." she laid her hand on lydia's with a rattle of bracelets. "you'll help me, won't you?"lydia drew back from the smiling fierceness of her brows."i'm sorry but i don't think i understand. my husband has said nothing to me of of yours."the great black crescents above mrs. linton's eyes met angrily."i say is that true?" she demanded.lydia rose from her seat."oh, look here, i didn't mean that, you know you mustn't take one up so! can't you see how rattled i am?"lydia saw that, in fact, her beautiful mouth was quivering beneath softened eyes."i'm beside myself!" the splendid creature wailed, dropping into her seat."i'm so sorry," lydia repeated, forcing herself to speak kindly; "but how can i help you?"mrs. linton raised her head sharply."by finding out there's a darling!""finding what out?""what trevenna told him.""trevenna ?" lydia echoed in bewilderment.mrs. linton clapped her hand to her mouth."oh, lord there, it's out! what a fool i am! but i supposed of course you knew; i supposed everybody knew." she dried her eyes and bridled. "didn't you know that he's lord trevenna? i'm mrs. cope."lydia recognized the names. they had figured in a flamboyant elopement which had thrilled fashionable london some six months earlier."now you see how it is you understand, don't you?" mrs. cope continued on a note of appeal. "i knew you would that's the reason i came to you. i suppose he felt the same thing about your husband; he's not spoken to another soul in the place." her face grew anxious again. "he's awfully sensitive, generally he feels our position, he says as if it wasn't my place to feel that! but when he does get talking there's no knowing what he'll say. i know he's been brooding over something lately, and i must find out what it is it's to his interest that i should. i always tell him that i think only of his interest; if he'd only trust me! but he's been so odd lately i can't think what he's plotting. you will help me, dear?"lydia, who had remained standing, looked away uncomfortably."if you mean by finding out what lord trevenna has told my husband, i'm afraid it's impossible.""why impossible?""because i infer that is was told in confidence."mrs. cope stared incredulously."well, what of that? your husband looks such a dear anyone can see he's awfully gone on you. what's to prevent your getting it out of him?"lydia flushed."i'm not a spy!" she exclaimed."a spy a spy? how dare you?" mrs. cope flamed out. "oh, i don't mean that either! don't be angry with me i'm so miserable." she essayed a softer note. "do you call that spying for one woman to help out another? i do need help so dreadfully! i'm at my wits' end with trevenna, i am indeed. he's such a boy a mere baby, you know; he's only two-and-twenty." she dropped her orbed lids. "he's younger than me only fancy, a few months younger. i tell him he ought to listen to me as if i was his mother, oughtn't he now? but he won't, he won't! all his people are at him, you see oh, i know their little game! trying to get him away from me before i can get my divorce that's what they're up to. at first he wouldn't listen to them; he used to toss their letters over to me to read; but now he reads them himself, and answers 'em too, i fancy; he's always shut up in his room, writing. if i only knew what his plan is i could stop him fa! st enough he's such a simpleton. but he's dreadfully deep too at times i can't make him out. but i know he's told your husband everything i knew that last night the minute i laid eyes on him. and i must find out you must help me i've got no one else to turn to!"she caught lydia's fingers in a stormy pressure."say you'll help me you and your husband."lydia tried to free herself."what you ask is impossible; you must see that it is. no one could interfere in in the way you ask."mrs. cope's clutch tightened."you won't, then? you won't?""certainly not. let me go, please."mrs. cope released her with a laugh."oh, go by all means pray don't let me detain you! shall you go and tell lady susan condit that there's a pair of us or shall i save you the trouble of enlightening her?"lydia stood still in the middle of the path, seeing her antagonist through a mist of terror. mrs. cope was still laughing."oh, i'm not spiteful by nature, my dear; but you're a little more than flesh and blood can stand! it's impossible, is it? let you go, indeed! you're too good to be mixed up in my affairs, are you? why, you little fool, the first day i laid eyes on you i saw that you and i were both in the same box that's the reason i spoke to you."she stepped nearer, her smile dilating on lydia like a lamp through a fog."you can take your choice, you know; i always play fair. if you'll tell i'll promise not to. now then, which is it to be?"lydia, involuntarily, had begun to move away from the pelting storm of words; but at this she turned and sat down again."you may go," she said simply. "i shall stay here."ivshe stayed there for a long time, in the hypnotized contemplation, not of mrs. cope's present, but of her own past. gannett, early that morning, had gone off on a long walk he had fallen into the habit of taking these mountain tramps with various fellow lodgers; but even had he been within reach she could not have gone to him just then. she had to deal with herself first. she was surprised to find how, in the last months, she had lost the habit of introspection. since their coming to the hotel bellosguardo she and gannett had tacitly avoided themselves and each other.she was aroused by the whistle of the three o'clock steamboat as it neared the landing just beyond the hotel gates. three o'clock! then gannett would soon be back he had told her to expect him before four. she rose hurriedly, her face averted from the inquisitorial facade of the hotel. she could not see him just yet; she could not go indoors. she slipped through one of the overgrown garden alleys and climbed a steep path to the hills.it was dark when she opened their sitting-room door. gannett was sitting on the window ledge smoking a cigarette. cigarettes were now his chief resource: he had not written a line during the two months they had spent at the hotel bellosguardo. in that respect, it had turned out not to be the right milieu after all.he started up at lydia's entrance."where have you been? i was getting anxious."she sat down in a chair near the door."up the mountain," she said wearily."alone?""yes."gannett threw away his cigarette: the sound of her voice made him want to see her face."shall we have a little light?" he suggested.she made no answer and he lifted the globe from the lamp and put a match to the wick. then he looked at her."anything wrong? you look done up."she sat glancing vaguely about the little sitting room, dimly lit by the pallid-globed lamp, which left in twilight the outlines of the furniture, of his writing table heaped with books and papers, of the tea roses and jasmine drooping on the mantelpiece. how like home it had all grown how like home!"lydia, what is wrong?" he repeated.she moved away from him, feeling for her hatpins and turning to lay her hat and sunshade on the table.suddenly she said: "that woman has been talking to me."gannett stared."that woman? what woman?""mrs. linton mrs. cope."he gave a start of annoyance, still, as she perceived, not grasping the full import of her words."the deuce! she told you ?""she told me everything."gannett looked at her anxiously."what impudence! i'm so sorry that you should have been exposed to this, dear.""exposed!" lydia laughed.gannett's brow clouded and they looked away from each other."do you know why she told me? she had the best of reasons. the first time she laid eyes on me she saw that we were both in the same box.""lydia!""so it was natural, of course, that she should turn to me in a difficulty.""what difficulty?""it seems she has reason to think that lord trevenna's people are trying to get him away from her before she gets her divorce ""well?""and she fancied he had been consulting with you last night as to as to the best way of escaping from her."gannett stood up with an angry forehead."well what concern of yours was all this dirty business? why should she go to you?""don't you see? it's so simple. i was to wheedle his secret out of you.""to oblige that woman?""yes; or, if i was unwilling to oblige her, then to protect myself.""to protect yourself? against whom?""against her telling everyone in the hotel that she and i are in the same box.""she threatened that?""she left me the choice of telling it myself or of doing it for me.""the beast!"there was a long silence. lydia had seated herself on the sofa, beyond the radius of the lamp, and he leaned against the window. his next question surprised her."when did this happen? at what time, i mean?"she looked at him vaguely."i don't know after luncheon, i think. yes, i remember, it must have been at about three o'clock."he stepped into the middle of the room and as he approached the light she saw that his brow had cleared."why do you ask?" she said."because when i came in, at about half-past three, the mail was just being distributed, and mrs. cope was waiting as usual to pounce on her letters; you know she was always watching for the postman. she was standing so close to me that i couldn't help seeing a big official-looking envelope that was handed to her. she tore it open, gave one look at the inside, and rushed off upstairs like a whirlwind, with the director shouting after her that she had left all her other letters behind. i don't believe she ever thought of you again after that paper was put into her hand.""why?""because she was too busy. i was sitting in the window, watching for you, when the five o'clock boat left, and who should go on board, bag and baggage, valet and maid, dressing bags and poodle, but mrs. cope and trevenna. just an hour and a half to pack up in! and you should have seen her when they started. she was radiant shaking hands with everybody waving her handkerchief from the deck 8212distributing bows and smiles like an empress. if ever a woman got what she wanted just in the nick of time that woman did. she'll be lady trevenna within a week, i'll wager.""you think she has her divorce?""i'm sure of it. and she must have got it just after her talk with you."lydia was silent.at length she said, with a kind of reluctance, "she was horribly angry when she left me. it wouldn't have taken long to tell lady susan condit.""lady susan condit has not been told.""how do you you know.""because when i went downstairs half an hour ago i met lady susan on the way "he stopped, half smiling."well?""and she stopped to ask if i thought you would act as patroness to a charity concert she is getting up."in spite of themselves they both broke into a laugh. lydia's ended in sobs and she sank down with her face hidden. gannett bent over her, seeking her hands."that vile woman i ought to have warned you to keep away from her; i can't forgive myself! but he spoke to me in confidence; and i never dreamed well, it's all over now."lydia lifted her head."not for me. it's only just beginning.""what do you mean?"she put him gently aside and moved in her turn to the window. then she went on, with her face turned toward the shimmering blackness of the lake, "you see of course that it might happen again at any moment.""what?""this this risk of being found out. and we could hardly count again on such a lucky combination of chances, could we?"he sat down with a groan.still keeping her face toward the darkness, she said, "i want you to go and tell lady susan and the others."gannett, who had moved towards her, paused a few feet off."why do you wish me to do this?" he said at length, with less surprise in his voice than she had been prepared for."because i've behaved basely, abominably, since we came here: letting these people believe we were married lying with every breath i drew ""yes, i've felt that too," gannett exclaimed with sudden energy.the words shook her like a tempest: all her thoughts seemed to fall about her in ruins."you you've felt so?""of course i have." he spoke with low-voiced vehemence. "do you suppose i like playing the sneak any better than you do? it's damnable."he had dropped on the arm of a chair, and they stared at each other like blind people who suddenly see."but you have liked it here," she faltered."oh, i've liked it i've liked it." he moved impatiently. "haven't you?""yes," she burst out; "that's the worst of it that's what i can't bear. i fancied it was for your sake that i insisted on staying because you thought you could write here; and perhaps just at first that really was the reason. but afterwards i wanted to stay myself i loved it." she broke into a laugh. "oh, do you see the full derision of it? these people the very prototypes of the bores you took me away from, with the same fenced-in view of life, the same keep-off-the-grass morality, the same little cautious virtues and the same little frightened vices well, i've clung to them, i've delighted in them, i've done my best to please them. i've toadied lady susan, i've gossiped with miss pinsent, i've pretended to be shocked with mrs. ainger. respectability! it was the one thing in life that i was sure i didn't care about, and it's grown so precious to me that i've stolen it because i couldn't get it any other way."she moved across the room and returned to his side with another laugh."i who used to fancy myself unconventional! i must have been born with a cardcase in my hand. you should have seen me with that poor woman in the garden. she came to me for help, poor creature, because she fancied that, having 'sinned,' as they call it, i might feel some pity for others who had been tempted in the same way. not i! she didn't know me. lady susan would have been kinder, because lady susan wouldn't have been afraid. i hated the woman my one thought was not to be seen with her i could have killed her for guessing my secret. the one thing that mattered to me at that moment was my standing with lady susan!"gannett did not speak."and you you've felt it too!" she broke out accusingly. "you've enjoyed being with these people as much as i have; you've let the chaplain talk to you by the hour about the reign of law and professor drummond. when they asked you to hand the plate in church i was watching you you wanted to accept."she stepped close, laying her hand on his arm."do you know, i begin to see what marriage is for. it's to keep people away from each other. sometimes i think that two people who love each other can be saved from madness only by the things that come between them children, duties, visits, bores, relations the things that protect married people from each other. we've been too close together-that has been our sin. we've seen the nakedness of each other's souls."she sank again on the sofa, hiding her face in her hands.gannett stood above her perplexedly: he felt as though she were being swept away by some implacable current while he stood helpless on its bank.at length he said, "lydia, don't think me a brute but don't you see yourself that it won't do?""yes, i see it won't do," she said without raising her head.his face cleared."then we'll go tomorrow.""go where?""to paris; to be married."for a long time she made no answer; then she asked slowly, "would they have us here if we were married?""have us here?""i mean lady susan and the others.""have us here? of course they would.""not if they knew at least, not unless they could pretend not to know."he made an impatient gesture."we shouldn't come back here, of course; and other people needn't know no one need know."she sighed. "then it's only another form of deception and a meaner one. don't you see that?""i see that we're not accountable to any lady susans on earth!""then why are you ashamed of what we are doing here?""because i'm sick of pretending that you're my wife when you're not when you won't be."she looked at him sadly."if i were your wife you'd have to go on pretending. you'd have to pretend that i'd never been anything else. and our friends would have to pretend that they believed what you pretended."gannett pulled off the sofa tassel and flung it away."you're impossible," he groaned."it's not i it's our being together that's impossible. i only want you to see that marriage won't help it.""what will help it then?"she raised her head."my leaving you.""your leaving me?" he sat motionless, staring at the tassel which lay at the other end of the room. at length some impulse of retaliation for the pain she was inflicting made him say deliberately:"and where would you go if you left me?""oh!" she cried.he was at her side in an instant."lydia lydia you know i didn't mean it; i couldn't mean it! but you've driven me out of my senses; i don't know what i'm saying. can't you get out of this labyrinth of self-torture? it's destroying us both.""that's why i must leave you.""how easily you say it!" he drew her hands down and made her face him. "you're very scrupulous about yourself and others. but have you thought of me? you have no right to leave me unless you've ceased to care ""it's because i care ""then i have a right to be heard. if you love me you can't leave me."her eyes defied him."why not?"he dropped her hands and rose from her side."can you?" he said sadly.the hour was late and the lamp flickered and sank. she stood up with a shiver and turned toward the door of her room.vat daylight a sound in lydia's room woke ganett from a troubled sleep. he sat up and listened. she was moving about softly, as though fearful of disturbing him. he heard her push back one of the creaking shutters; then there was a moment's silence, which seemed to indicate that she was waiting to see if the noise had roused him.presently she began to move again. she had spent a sleepless night, probably, and was dressing to go down to the garden for a breath of air. gannett rose also; but some undefinable instinct made his movements as cautious as hers. he stole to his window and looked out through the slats of the shutter.it had rained in the night and the dawn was gray and lifeless. the cloud-muffled hills across the lake were reflected in its surface as in a tarnished mirror. in the garden, the birds were beginning to shake the drops from the motionless laurustinus boughs.an immense pity for lydia filled gannett's soul. her seeming intellectual independence had blinded him for a time to the feminine cast of her mind. he had never thought of her as a woman who wept and clung: there was a lucidity in her intuitions that made them appear to be the result of reasoning. now he saw the cruelty he had committed in detaching her from the normal conditions of life; he felt, too, the insight with which she had hit upon the real cause of their suffering. their life was "impossible," as she had said and its worst penalty was that it had made any other life impossible for them. even had his love lessened, he was bound to her now by a hundred ties of pity and self-reproach; and she, poor child, must turn back to him as latude returned to his cell.a new sound startled him: it was the stealthy closing of lydia's door. he crept to his own and heard her footsteps passing down the corridor. then he went back to the window and looked out.a minute or two later he saw her go down the steps of the porch and enter the garden. from his post of observation her face was invisible, but something about her appearance struck him. she wore a long traveling cloak and under its folds he detected the outline of a bag or bundle. he drew a deep breath and stood watching her.she walked quickly down the laurustinus alley toward the gate; there she paused a moment, glancing about the little shady square. the stone benches under the trees were empty, and she seemed to gather resolution from the solitude about her, for she crossed the square to the steamboat landing, and he saw her pause before the ticket office at the head of the wharf. now she was buying her ticket. gannett turned his head a moment to look at the clock: the boat was due in five minutes. he had time to jump into his clothes and overtake herhe made no attempt to move; an obscure reluctance restrained him. if any thought emerged from the tumult of his sensations, it was that he must let her go if she wished it. he had spoken last night of his rights: what were they? at the last issue, he and she were two separate beings, not made one by the miracle of common forbearances, duties, abnegations, but bound together in a noyade of passion that left them resisting yet clinging as they went down.after buying her ticket, lydia had stood for a moment looking out across the lake; then he saw her seat herself on one of the benches near the landing. he and she, at that moment, were both listening for the same sound: the whistle of the boat as it rounded the nearest promontory. gannett turned again to glance at the clock: the boat was due now.where would she go? what would her life be when she had left him? she had no near relations and few friends. there was money enough . . . but she asked so much of life, in ways so complex and immaterial. he thought of her as walking barefooted through a stony waste. no one would understand her no one would pity her and he, who did both, was powerless to come to her aid.he saw that she had risen from the bench and walked toward the edge of the lake. she stood looking in the direction from which the steamboat was to come; then she turned to the ticket office, doubtless to ask the cause of the delay. after that she went back to the bench and sat down with bent head. what was she thinking of?the whistle sounded; she started up, and gannett involuntarily made a movement toward the door. but he turned back and continued to watch her. she stood motionless, her eyes on the trail of smoke that preceded the appearance of the boat. then the little craft rounded the point, a dead white object on the leaden water: a minute later it was puffing and backing at the wharf.the few passengers who were waiting two or three peasants and a snuffy priest were clustered near the ticket office. lydia stood apart under the trees.the boat lay alongside now; the gangplank was run out and the peasants went on board with their baskets of vegetables, followed by the priest. still lydia did not move. a bell began to ring querulously; there was a shriek of steam, and someone must have called to her that she would be late, for she started forward, as though in answer to a summons. she moved waveringly, and at the edge of the wharf she paused. gannett saw a sailor beckon to her; the bell rang again and she stepped upon the gangplank.halfway down the short incline to the deck she stopped again; then she turned and ran back to the land. the gangplank was drawn in, the bell ceased to ring, and the boat backed out into the lake. lydia, with slow steps, was walking toward the garden.as she approached the hotel she looked up furtively and gannett drew back into the room. he sat down beside a table; a bradshaw lay at his elbow, and mechanically, without knowing what he did, he began looking out the trains to paris.everything he kept saying is something it isn't. and everybody is always somewhere else. maybe it was the city, being in the city, that made him feel how queer everything was and that it was something else. maybe he kept thinking it was the names of the things. the names were tex and frequently koid. or they were flex and oid or they were duroid sand or flexsan duro, but everything was glass but not quite glass and the thing that you touched the surface, washable, crease-resistant was rubber, only it wasn't quite rubber and you didn't quite touch it but almost. the wall, which was glass but turned out on being approached not to be a wall, it was something else, it was an opening or doorway--and the doorway through which he saw himself approaching turned out to be something else, it was a wall. and what he had eaten not having agreed with him.he was in a washable house, but he wasn't sure. now about those rats, he kept saying to himself. he meant the rats that the professor had driven crazy by forcing them to deal with problems which were beyond the scope of rats, the insoluble problems. he meant the rats that had been trained to jump at the square card with the circle in the middle, and the card because it was something it wasn't would give way and let the rat into a place where the food was, but then one day it would be a trick played on the rat, and the card would be changed, and the rat would jump but the card wouldn't give way, and it was an impossible situation for a rat and the rat would go insane and into its eyes would come the unspeakably bright imploring look of the frustrated, and after the convulsions were over and the frantic racing around, then the passive stage would set in and the willingness to let anything be  done to it, even if it was something else.he didn't know which door or wall or opening in the house to jump at, to get through, because one was an opening that wasn't a door it was a void, or kid and the other was a wall that wasn't an opening, it was a sanitary cupboard of the same color. he caught a glimpse of his eyes staring into his eyes, in the and in them was the expression he had seen in the picture of the rats--weary after convulsions and the frantic racing around, when they were willing and did not mind having anything done to them. more and more he kept saying i am confronted by a problem which is incapable of solution for this time even if he chose the right door, there would be no food behind it and that is what madness is, and things seeming different from what they are. he heard, in the house where he was, in the city to which he had gone as toward a door which might, or might not, give way, a noise--not a loud noise but more of a low prefabricated humming. it came from a place in the base of the wall or stat where the flue carrying the filterable air was, and not far from the minipiano, which was made of the same material nailbrushes are made of, and which was under the stairs. "this, too, has been tested," she said, pointing, but not at it, "and found viable." it wasn't a loud noise, he kept thinking, sorry that he had seen his eyes, even though it was through his own eyes that he had seen them.first will come the convulsions he said, then the exhaustion, then the willingness to let anything be done. "and you better believe it will be."all his life he had been confronted by situations which were incapable of being solved, and there was a deliberateness behind all this, behind this changing of the card or door, because they would always wait until you had learned to jump at the certain card or door--the one with the circle--and then they would change it on you. there have been so many doors changed on me, he said, in the last twenty years, but it is now becoming clear that it is an impossible situation, and the question is whether to jump again, even though they ruffle you in the rump with a blast of air--to make you jump. he wished he wasn't standing by the minipiano. first they would teach you the prayers and the psalms, and that would be the right doorthe one with the circle and the long sweet words with the holy sound, and that would be the one to jump at to get where the food was. then one day you jumped and it  didn't give way, so that all you got was the bump on the nose, and the first bewilderment, the first young bewilderment.i don't know whether to tell her about the door they substituted or not, he said, the one with the equation on it and the picture of the amoeba reproducing itself by division. or the one with the photostatic copy of the check for thirty-two dollars and fifty cents. but the jumping was so long ago, although the bump is . . . how those old wounds hurt! being crazy this way wouldn't be so bad if only, if only. if only when you put your foot forward to  take a step, the ground wouldn't come up to meet your foot the way it does. and the same way in the street only i may never get back to the street unless i jump at the right door, the curb coming up to meet your foot, anticipating ever so delicately the weight of the body, which is somewhere else. "we could take your name," she said, "and send it to you." and it wouldn't be so bad if only you could read a sentence all the way through without jumping your eye to something else on the same page; and then he kept thinking there was that man out in jersey, the one who started to chop his trees down, one by one, the man who began talking about how he would take his house to pieces, brick by brick, because he faced a problem incapable of solution, probably, so he began to hack at the trees in the yard, began to pluck with trembling fingers at the bricks in the house. even if a house is not  washable, it is worth taking down. it is not till later that the exhaustion sets in.but it is inevitable that they will keep changing the doors on you, he said, because that is what they are for; and the thing is to get used to it and not let it unsettle the mind. but that would mean not jumping, and you can't. nobody can not jump. there will be no not-jumping. among rats, perhaps, but among people never. everybody has to keep jumping at a door the one with the circle on it because that is the way everybody is, especially some  people. you wouldn't want me, standing here, to tell you, would you, about my friend the poet deceased who said, "my heart has followed all my days something i cannot name"? it had the circle on it. and like many poets, although few so beloved, he is gone. it killed him, the jumping. first, of course, there were the preliminary bouts, the convulsions, and the calm and the willingness.i remember the door with the picture of the girl on it only it was spring, her arms outstretched in loveliness, her dress it was the one with the circle on it uncaught, beginning the slow, clear, blinding cascade-and i guess we would all like to try that door again, for it seemed like the way and for a while it was the way, the door would open and you would go through winged and exalted like any rat and the food would be there, the way the professor had it arranged, everything o.k., and you had chosen the right door for the world was young. the time they changed that door on me, my nose bled for a hundred hours--how do you like that, madam? or would you prefer to show me further through this so strange house, or you could take my name and send it to me, for although my heart has followed all my days something i cannot name, i am tired of the jumping and i do not know which way to go, madam, and i am not even sure that i am not tired beyond the endurance of man rat, if you will and have taken leave of sanity. what are you following these days, old friend, after your recovery from the last bump? what is the name, or is it something you cannot name? the rats have a name for it by this time, perhaps, but i don't know what they call it. i call it and it comes in sheets, something like insulating board, unattainable and ugli-proof.and there was the man out in jersey, because i keep thinking about his terrible necessity and the passion and trouble he had gone to all those years in the indescribable abundance of a householder's detail, building the estate and the planting of the trees and in spring the lawn-dressing and in fall the bulbs for the spring burgeoning, and the watering of the grass on the long light evenings in summer and the gravel for the driveway all had to be thought out, planned and the decorative borders, probably, the perennials and the bug spray, and the building of the house from plans of the architect, first the sills, then the studs, then the full corn in the ear, the floors laid on the floor timbers, smoothed, and then the carpets upon the smooth floors and the curtains and the rods therefor. and then, almost without warning, he would be jumping at the same old door and it wouldn't give: they had changed it on him, making life no longer supportable under the elms in the elm shade, under the maples in the maple shade."here you have the maximum of openness in a small room."it was impossible to say maybe it was the city what made him feel the way he did, and i am not the only one either, he kept thinking--ask any doctor if i am. the doctors, they know how many there are, they even know where the trouble is only they don't like to tell you about the prefrontal lobe because that means making a hole in your skull and removing the work of centuries. it took so long coming, this lobe, so many, many years. is it something you read in the paper, perhaps? and now, the strain being so great, the door having been changed by the professor once too often . . . but it only means a whiff of ether, a few deft strokes, and the higher animal becomes a little easier in his mind and more like the lower one. from now on, you see, that's the way it will be, the ones with the small prefrontal lobes will win because the other ones are hurt too much by this incessant bumping. they can stand just so much, em, doctor? and what is that, pray, that you have in your hand? still, you never can tell, em, madam?he crossed carefully the room, the thick carpet under him softly, and went toward the door carefully, which was glass and he could see himself in it, and which, at his approach, opened to allow him to pass through; and beyond he half expected to find one of the old doors that he had known, perhaps the one with the circle, the one with the girl her arms outstretched in loveliness and beauty before him. but he saw instead a moving stairway, and descended in light he kept thinking to the street below and to the other people. as he stepped off, the ground came up slightly, to meet his foot.they were new patients to me, all i had was the name, olson. please come down as soon as you can, my daughter is very sick.when i arrived i was met by the mother, a big startled looking woman, very clean and apologetic who merely said, is this the doctor? and let me in. in the back, she added. you must excuse us, doctor, we have her in the kitchen where it is warm. it is very damp here sometimes.the child was fully dressed and sitting on her father's lap near the kitchen table. he tried to get up, but i motioned for him not to bother, took off my overcoat and started to look things over. i could see that they were all very nervous, eyeing me up and down distrustfully. as often, in such cases, they weren't telling me more than they had to, it was up to me to tell them; that's why they were spending three dollars on me.the child was fairly eating me up with her cold, steady eyes, and no expression to her face whatever. she did not move and seemed, inwardly, quiet; an unusually attractive little thing, and as strong as a heifer in appearance. but her face was flushed, she was breathing rapidly, and i realized that she had a high fever. she had magnificent blonde hair, in profusion. one of those picture children often reproduced in advertising leaflets and the photogravure sections of the sunday papers.she's had a fever for three days, began the father and we don't know what it comes from. my wife has given her things, you know, like people do, but it don't do no good. and there's been a lot of sickness around. so we tho't you'd better look her over and tell us what is the matter.as doctors often do i took a trial shot at it as a point of departure. has she had a sore throat?both parents answered me together, no . . . no, she says her throat don't hurt her.does your throat hurt you? added the mother to the child. but the little girl's expression didn't change nor did she move her eyes from my face.have you looked?i tried to, said the mother, but i couldn't see.as it happens we had been having a number of cases of diphtheria in the school to which this child went during that month and we were all, quite apparently, thinking of that, though no one had as yet spoken of the thing.well, i said, suppose we take a look at the throat first. i smiled in my best professional manner and asking for the child's first name i said, come on, mathilda, open your mouth and let's take a look at your throat.nothing doing.aw, come on, i coaxed, just open your mouth wide and let me take a look. look, i said opening both hands wide, i haven't anything in my hands. just open up and let me see.such a nice man, put in the mother. look how kind he is to you. come on, do what he tells you to. he won't hurt you.at that i ground my teeth in disgust. if only they wouldn't use the word "hurt" i might be able to get somewhere. but i did not allow myself to be hurried or disturbed but speaking quietly and slowly i approached the child again.as i moved my chair a little nearer suddenly with one catlike movement both her hands clawed instinctively for my eyes and she almost reached them too. in fact she knocked my glasses flying and they fell, though unbroken, several feet away from me on the kitchen floor.both the mother and father almost turned themselves inside out in embarrassment and apology. you bad girl, said the mother, taking her and shaking her by one arm. look what you've done. the nice man . . .for heaven's sake, i broke in. don't call me a nice man to her. i'm here to look at her throat on the chance that she might have diphtheria and possibly die of it. but that's nothing to her. look here, i said to the child, we're going to look at your throat. you're old enough to understand what i'm saying. will you open it now by yourself or shall we have to open it for you?not a move. even her expression hadn't changed. her breaths however were coming faster and faster. then the battle began. i had to do it. i had to have a throat culture for her own protection. but first i told the parents that it was entirely up to them. i explained the danger but said that i would not insist on a throat examination so long as they would take the responsibility.if you don't do what the doctor says you'll have to go to the hospital, the mother admonished her severely.oh yeah? i had to smile to myself. after all, i had already fallen in love with the savage brat, the parents were contemptible to me. in the ensuing struggle they grew more and more abject, crushed, exhausted while she surely rose to magnificent heights of insane fury of effort bred of her terror of me.the father tried his best, and he was a big man but the fact that she was his daughter, his shame at her behavior and his dread of hurting her made him release her just at the critical times when i had almost achieved success, till i wanted to kill him. but his dread also that she might have diphtheria made him tell me to go on, go on though he himself was almost fainting, while the mother moved back and forth behind us raising and lowering her hands in an agony of apprehension.put her in front of you on your lap, i ordered, and hold both her wrists.but as soon as he did the child let out a scream. don't, you're hurting me. let go of my hands. let them go i tell you. then she shrieked terrifyingly, hysterically. stop it! stop it! you're killing me!do you think she can stand it, doctor! said the mother.you get out, said the husband to his wife. do you want her to die of diphtheria?come on now, hold her, i said.then i grasped the child's head with my left hand and tried to get the wooden tongue depressor between her teeth. she fought, with clenched teeth, desperately! but now i also had grown furious--at a child. i tried to hold myself down but i couldn't. i know how to expose a throat for inspection. and i did my best. when finally i got the wooden spatula behind the last teeth and just the point of it into the mouth cavity, she opened up for an instant but before i could see anything she came down again and gripping the wooden blade between her molars she reduced it to splinters before i could get it out again.aren't you ashamed, the mother yelled at her. aren't you ashamed to act like that in front of the doctor?get me a smooth-handled spoon of some sort, i told the mother. we're going through with this. the child's mouth was already bleeding. her tongue was cut and she was screaming in wild hysterical shrieks. perhaps i should have desisted and come back in an hour or more. no doubt it would have been better. but i have seen at least two children lying dead in bed of neglect in such cases, and feeling that i must get a diagnosis now or never i went at it again. but the worst of it was that i too had got beyond reason. i could have torn the child apart in my own fury and enjoyed it. it was a pleasure to attack her. my face was burning with it.the damned little brat must be protected against her own idiocy, one says to one's self at such times. others must be protected against her. it is a social necessity. and all these things are true. but a blind fury, a feeling of adult shame, bred of a longing for muscular release are the operatives. one goes on to the end.in a final unreasoning assault i overpowered the child's neck and jaws. i forced the heavy silver spoon back of her teeth and down her throat till she gagged. and there it was--both tonsils covered with membrane. she had fought valiantly to keep me from knowing her secret. she had been hiding that sore throat for three days at least and lying to her parents in order to escape just such an outcome as this.now truly she was furious. she had been on the defensive before but now she attacked. tried to get off her father's lap and fly at me while tears of defeat blinded her eyes.tub had been waiting for an hour in the falling snow. he paced the sidewalk to keep warm and stuck his head out over the curb whenever he saw lights approaching. one driver stopped for him but before tub could wave the man on he saw the rifle on tub's back and hit the gas. the tires spun on the ice.the fall of snow thickened. tub stood below the overhang of a building. across the road the clouds whitened just above the rooftops, and the street lights went out. he shifted the rifle strap to his other shoulder. the whiteness seeped up the sky.a truck slid around the corner, horn blaring, rear end sashaying. tub moved to the sidewalk and held up his hand. the truck jumped the curb and kept coming, half on the street and half on the sidewalk. it wasn't slowing down at all. tub stood for a moment, still holding up his hand, then jumped back. his rifle slipped off his shoulder and clattered on the ice, a sandwich fell out of his pocket. he ran for the steps of the building. another sandwich and a package of cookies tumbled onto the new snow. he made the steps and looked back.a truck had stopped several feet beyond where tub had been standing. he picked up his sandwiches and his cookies and slung the rifle and went up to the driver's window. the driver was bent against the steering wheel, slapping his knees and drumming his feet on the floorboards. he looked like a cartoon of a person laughing, except that his eyes watched the man on the seat beside him. "you ought to see yourself," the driver said. "he looks just like a beach ball with a hat on, doesn't he? doesn't he, frank?"the man beside him smiled and looked off."you almost ran me down," tub said. "you could've killed me.""come on, tub, said the man beside the driver. "be mellow. kenny was just messing around." he opened the door and slid over to the middle of the seat.tub took the bolt out of his rifle and climbed in beside him. "i waited an hour," he said. "if you meant ten o'clock why didn't you say ten o'clock?""tub, you haven't done anything but complain since we got here," said the man in the middle. "if you want to piss and moan all day you might as well go home and bitch at your kids. take your pick." when tub didn't say anything he turned to the driver. "okay, kenny, let's hit the road."some juvenile delinquents had heaved a brick through the windshield on the driver's side, so the cold and snow tunneled right into the cab. the ehater didn't work. they covered themselves with a couple of blankets kenny had brought along and pulled down the muffs on their caps. tub tried to keep his hands warm by rubbing them under the blanket but frank made him stop.they left spokane and drove deep into the country, running along black lines of fences. the snow let up, but still there was no edge to the land where it met the sky. nothing moved in the chalky fields. the cold bleached their faces and made the stubble stand out on their cheeks and along their upper lips. they stopped twice for coffee before they got to the woods where kenny wanted to hunt.tub was for trying someplace different; two years in a row they'd been up and down this land and hadn't seen a thing. frank didn't care one way or the other, he just wanted to get out of the goddamned truck. "feel that," frank said, slamming the door. he spread his feet and closed his eyes and leaned his head way back and breathed deeply. "tune in on that energy.""another thing," kenny said. "this is open land. most of the land around here is posted.""i'm cold," tub said.frank breathed out. "stop bitching, tub. get centered.""i wasn't bitching.""centered," kenny said. "next thing you'll be wearing a nightgown, frank. selling flowers out at the airport.""kenny," frank said, "you talk too much.""okay," kenny said. "i won't say a word. like i won't say anything about a certain babysitter.""what babysitter?" tub asked."that's between us," frank said, looking at kenny. "that's confidential. you keep your mouth shut."kenny laughed."you're asking for it," frank said."asking for what?""you'll see.""hey," tub said, "are we hunting or what?"they started off across the field. tub had trouble getting through the fences. frank and kenny could have helped him; they could have lifted up on the top wire and stepped on the bottom wire, but they didn't. they stood and watched him. there were a lot of fences and tub was puffing when they reached the woods.they hunted for over two hours and saw no deer, no tracks, no sign. finally they stopped by the creek to eat. kenny had several slices of pizza and a couple of candy bars: frank had a sandwich, an apple, two carrots, and a square of chocolate; tub ate one hard-boiled egg and a stick of celery."you ask me how i want to die today," kenny said. "i'll tell you burn me at the stake." he turned to tub. "you still on that diet?" he winked at frank."what do you think? you think i like hard-boiled eggs?""all i can say is, it's the first diet i ever heard of where you gained weight from it.""who said i gained weight?""oh, pardon me. i take it back. you're just wasting away before my very eyes. isn't he, frank?"frank had his fingers fanned out, tips against the bark of the stump where he'd laid his food. his knuckles were hairy. he wore a heavy wedding band and on his right pinky another gold ring with a flat face and an "f" in what looked like diamonds. he turned the ring this way and that. "tub," he said, "you haven't seen your own balls in ten years."kenny doubled over laughing. he took off his hat and slapped his leg with it."what am i supped to do?" tub said. "it's my glands."they left the woods and hunted along the creek. frank and kenny worked one bank and tub worked the other, moving upstream. the snow was light but the drifts were deep and hard to move through. wherever tub looked the surface was smooth, undisturbed, and after a time he lost interest. he stopped looking for tracks and just tried to keep up with frank and kenny on the other side. a moment came when he realized he hadn't seen them in a long time. the breeze was moving from him to them; when it stilled he could sometimes hear kenny laughing but that was all. he quickened his pace, breasting hard into the drifts, fighting away the snow with his knees and elbows. he heard his heart and felt the flush on his face but he never once stopped.tub caught up with frank and kenny at a bend of the creek. they were standing on a log that stretched from their bank to his. ice had backed up behind the log. frozen reeds stuck out, barely nodding when the air moved."see anything?" frank asked.tub shook his head.there wasn't much daylight left and they decided to head back toward the road. frank and kenny crossed the log and they started downstream, using the trail tub had broken. before they had gone very far kenny stopped. "look at that," he said, and pointed to some tracks going form the creek back into the woods. tub's footprints crossed right over them. there on the bank, plain as day, were several mounds of deer sign. "what do you think that is, tub?" kenny kicked at it. "walnuts on vanilla icing?""i guess i didn't notice."kenny looked at frank."i was lost.""you were lost. big deal."they followed the tracks into the woods. the deer had gone over a fence half buried in drifting snow. a no hunting sign was nailed to the top of one of the posts. frank laughed and said the son of a bitch could read. kenny wanted to go after him but frank said no way, the people out here didn't mess around. he thought maybe the farmer who owned the land would let them use it if they asked. kenny wasn't so sure. anyway, he figured that by the time they walked to the truck and drove up the road and doubled back it would be almost dark."relax," frank said. "you can't hurry nature. if we're meant to get that deer, we'll get it. if we're not, we won't."they started back toward the truck. this part of the woods was mainly pine. the snow was shaded and had a glaze on it. it held up kenny and frank but tub kept falling through. as he kicked forward, the edge of the crust bruised his shins. kenny and frank pulled ahead of him, to where he couldn't even hear their voices any more. he sat down on a stump and wiped his face. he ate both the sandwiches and half the cookies, taking his own sweet time. it was dead quiet.when tub crossed the last fence into the toad the truck started moving. tub had to run for it and just managed to grab hold of the tailgate and hoist himself into the bed. he lay there, panting. kenny looked out the rear window and grinned. tub crawled into the lee of the cab to get out of the freezing wind. he pulled his earflaps low and pushed his chin into the collar of his coat. someone rapped on the window but tub would not turn around.he and frank waited outside while kenny went into the farmhouse to ask permission. the house was old and paint was curling off the sides. the smoke streamed westward off the top of the chimney, fanning away into a thin gray plume. above the ridge of the hills another ridge of blue clouds was rising."you've got a short memory," tub said."what?" frank said. he had been staring off."i used to stick up for you.""okay, so you used to stick up for me. what's eating you?""you shouldn't have just left me back there like that.""you're a grown-up, tub. you can take care of yourself. anyway, if you think you're the only person with problems i can tell you that you're not.""is there something bothering you, frank?"frank kicked at a branch poking out of the snow. "never mind," he said."what did kenny mean about the babysitter?""kenny talks too much," frank said. "you just mind your own business."kenny came out of the farmhouse and gave the thumbs-up and they began walking back toward the woods. as they passed the barn a large black hound with a grizzled snout ran out and barked at them. every time he barked he slid backwards a bit, like a cannon recoiling. kenny got down on all fours and snarled and barked back at him, and the dog slunk away into the barn, looking over his shoulder and peeing a little as he went."that's an old-timer," frank said. "a real graybeard. fifteen years if he's a day.""too old," kenny said.past the barn they cut off through the field.s the land was unfenced and the crust was freezing up thick and they made good time. they kept to the edge of the field until they picked up the tracks again and followed them into the woods, farther and farther back toward the hills. the trees started to blur wiht the shadows and the wind rose and needled their faces with the crystals it swept off the glaze. finally they lost the tracks.kenny swore and threw down his hat. "this is the worst day of hunting i ever had, bar none." he picked up his hat and brushed off the snow. "this will be the first season since i was fifteen i haven't got my deer.""it isn't the deer," frank said. "it's the hunting. there are all these forces out here and you just have to go with them.""you go with them," kenny said. "i came out here to get me a deer, no listen to a bunch of hippie bullshit. and if it hadn't been for dimples here i would have, too.""that's enough," frank said."and you--you're so busy thinking about that little jailbait of yours you wouldn't know a deer if you saw one.""drop dead," frank said, and turned away.kenny and tub followed him back across the fields. when they were coming up to the barn kenny stopped and pointed. "i hate that post," he said. he raised his rifle and fired. it sounded like a dry branch cracking. the post splintered along its right side, up toward the top. "there," kenny said. "it's dead.""knock it off," frank said, walking ahead.kenny looked at tub. he smiled. "i hate that tree," he said, and fired again. tub hurried to catch up with frank. he started to speak but just then the dog ran out of the barn and barked at them. "easy, boy," frank said."i hate that dog." kenny was behind them."that's enough," frank said. "you put that gun down."kenny fired. the bullet went in between the dog's eyes. he sank right down into the snow, his legs splayed out on each side, his yellow eyes open and staring. except for the blood he looked like a small bearskin rug. the blood ran down the dog's muzzle into the snow.they all looked at the dog lying there."what did he ever do to you?" tub asked. "he was just barking."kenny turned to tub. "i hate you."tub shot from the waist. kenny jerked backward against the fence and buckled to his knees. he folded his hands across his stomach. "look," he said. his hands were covered with blood. in the dusk his blood was more blue than red. it seemed to below to the shadows. it didn't seem out of place. kenny eased himself onto his back. he sighed several times, deeply. "you shot me," he said."i had to," tub said. he knelt beside kenny. "oh god," he said. "frank. frank."frank hadn't moved since kenny killed the dog."frank!" tub shouted."i was just kidding around," kenny said. "it was a joke. oh!" he said, and arched his back suddenly. "oh!" he said again, and dug his heels into the snow and pushed himself along on his head for several feet. then he stopped and lay there, rocking back and forth on his heels and head like a wrestler doing warm- up exercises.frank roused himself. "kenny," he said. he bent down and put his gloved hand on kenny's brow. "you shot him," he said to tub."he made me," tub said."no no no," kenny said.tub was weeping from the eyes and nostrils. his whole face was wet. frank closed his eyes, then looked down at kenny again. "where does it hurt?""everywhere," kenny said, "just everywhere.""oh god," tub said."i mean where did it go in?" frank said."here." kenny pointed at the wound in his stomach. it was welling slowly with blood."you're lucky," frank said. "it's on the left side. it missed your appendix. if it had hit your appendix you'd really be in the soup." he turned and threw up onto the snow, holding his sides as if to keep warm."are you all right?" tub said."there's some aspirin in the truck," kenny said."i'm all right," frank said."we'd better call an ambulance," tub said."jesus," frank said. "what are we going to say?""exactly what happened," tub said. "he was going to shoot me but i shot him first.""no sir!" kenny said. "i wasn't either!"frank patted kenny on the arm. "easy does it, partner." he stood. "let's go."tub picked up kenny's rifle as they walked down toward the farmhouse. "no sense leaving this around," he said. "kenny might get ideas.""i can tell you one thing," frank said. "you've really done it this time. this definitely takes the cake."they had to knock on the door twice before it was opened by a thin man with lank hair. the room behind him was filled with smoke. he squinted at them. "you get anything?" he asked."no," frank said."i knew you wouldn't. that's what i told the other fellow.""we've had an accident."the man looked past frank and tub into the gloom. "shoot your friend, did you?"frank nodded."i did," tub said."i suppose you want to use the phone.""if it's okay."the man in the door looked behind him, then stepped back. frank and tub followed him into the house. there was a woman sitting by the stove in the middle of the room. the stove was smoking badly. she looked up and then down again at the child asleep in her lap. her face was white and damp; strands of hair were pasted across her forehead. tub warmed his hands over the stove while frank went into the kitchen to call. the man who had let them in stood at the window, his hands in his pockets."my friend shot your dog," tub said.the man nodded without turning around. "i should have done it myself. i just couldn't." "he loved that dog so much," the woman said. the child squirmed and she rocked it."you asked him to?" tub said. "you asked him to shoot your dog?""he was old and sick. couldn't chew his food any more. i would have done it myself but i don't have a gun.""you couldn't have anyway," the woman said. "never in a million years."the man shrugged.frank came out of the kitchen. "we'll have to take him ourselves. the nearest hospital is fifty miles from here and all their ambulances are out anyway."the woman knew a shortcut but the directions were complicated and tub had to write them down. the man told them where they could find some boards to carry kenny on. he didn't have a flashlight but he said he would leave the porch light on.it was dark outside. the clouds were low and heavy-looking and the wind blew in shrill gusts. there was a screen loose on the house and it banged slowly and then quickly as the wind rose again. they could hear it all the way to the barn. frank went for the boards while tub looked for kenny, who was not where they had left him. tub found him farther up the drive, lying on stomach. "you okay?" tub said."it hurts.""frank says it missed your appendix.""i already had my appendix out.""all right," frank said, coming up to them. "we'll have you in a nice warm bed before you can say jack robinson." he put the two boards on kenny's right side."just as long as i don't have one of those male nurses," kenny said."ha ha," frank said. "that's the spirit. get ready, set, _over you go_" and he rolled kenny onto the boards. kenny screamed and kicked his legs in the air. when he quieted down frank and tub lifted the boards and carried him down the drive. tub had the back end, and with the snow blowing in his face he had trouble with his footing. also he was tired and the man inside had forgotten to turn the porch light on. just past the house tub slipped and threw out his hands to catch himself. the boards fell and kenny tumbled out and rolled to the bottom of the drive, yelling all the way. he came to rest against the right front wheel of the truck.""you fat moron," frank said. "you aren't good for diddly."tub grabbed frank by the collar and back him hard up against the fence. frank tried to pull his hands away but tub shook him and snapped his head back and forth and finally frank gave up."what do you know about fat," tub said. "what do you know about glands." as he spoke he kept shaking frank. "what do you know about me.""all right," frank said."no more," tub said."all right.""no more talking to me like that. no more watching. no more laughing.""okay, tub. i promise."tub let go of frank and leaned his forehead against the fence. his arms hung straight at his sides."i'm sorry, tub." frank touched him on the shoulder. "i'll be down at the truck."tub stood by the fence for a while and then got the rifles off the porch. frank had rolled kenny back onto the boards and they lifted him into the bed of the truck. frank spread the seat blankets over him. "warm enough?" he asked.kenny nodded."okay. now how does reverse work on this thing?""all the way to the left and up." kenny sat up as frank started forward to the cab. "frank!""what?""if it sticks don't force it.the truck started right away. "one thing," frank said, "you've got to hand it to the japanese. a very ancient, very spiritual culture and they can still make a hell of a truck." he glanced over at tub. "look, i'm sorry. i didn't know you felt that way, honest to god i didn't. you should have said something.""i did.""when? name one time.""a couple of hours ago.""i guess i wasn't paying attention.""that's true, frank," tub said. "you don't pay attention very much.""tub," frank said. "what happened back there, i should have been more sympathetic. i realize that. you were going through a lot. i just want you to know it wasn't your fault. he was asking for it.""you think so?""absolutely. it was him or you. i would have done the same thing in your shoes, no question."the wind was blowing into their faces. the snow was a moving white wall in front of their lights; it swirled into the cab through the hole in the windshield and settled on them. tub clapped his hands and shifted around to stay warm, but it didn't work."i'm going to have to stop," frank said. "i can't feel my fingers."up ahead they saw some lights off the road. it was a tavern. outside in the parking lot there were several jeeps and trucks. a couple of them had deer strapped across their hoods. frank parked and they went back to kenny. "how you doing, partner," frank said."i'm cold.""well, don't feel like the lone ranger. it's worse inside, take my word for it. you should get that windshield fixed.""look," tub said, "he threw the blankets off." they were lying in a heap against the tailgate."now look, kenny," frank said, "it's no use whining about being cold if you're not going to try and keep warm. you've got to do your share." he spread the blankets over kenny and tucked them in at the corners."they blew off.""hold on to them then.""why are we stopping, frank?""because if me and tub don't get warmed up we're going to freeze solid and then where will you be?" he punched kenny lightly in the arm. "so just hold your horses."the bar was full of men in colored jackets, mostly orange. the waitress brought coffee. "just what the doctor ordered," frank said, cradling the steaming cup in his hand. his skin was bone white. "tub, i've been thinking. what you said about me not paying attention, that's true.""it's okay.""no. i really had that coming. i guess i've just been a little too interested in old number one. i've had a lot on my mind. not that that's any excuse.""forget it, frank. i sort of lost my temper back there. i guess we're all a little on edge."frank shook his head. "it isn't just that.""you want to talk about it?""just between us, tub?""sure, frank. just between us.""tub, i think i'm going to be leaving nancy.""oh, frank. oh, frank." tub sat back and shook his head.frank reached out and laid his hand on tub's arm. "tub, have you ever been really in love?""well--""i mean _really_ in love." he squeezed tub's wrist. "with your whole being.""i don't know. when you put it like that, i don't know.""you haven't then. nothing against you, but you'd know it if you had." frank let go of tub's arm. "this isn't just some bit of fluff i'm talking about.""who is she, frank?"frank paused. he looked into his empty cup. "roxanne brewer.""cliff brewer's kid? the babysitter?""you can't just put people into categories like that, tub. that's why the whole system is wrong. and that's why this country is going to hell in a rowboat.""but she can't be mroe than--"tub shook his head."fifteen. she'll be sixteen in may." frank smiled. "may fourth, three twenty-seven p.m. hell, tub, a hundred years ago she'd have been an old maid by that age. juliet was only thirteen.""juliet? juliet miller? jesus, frank, she doesn't even have breasts. she doesn't even wear a top to her bathing suit. she's still collecting frogs.""not juliet miller. the real juliet. tub, don't you see how you're dividing people up into categories? he's an executive, she's a secretary, he's a truck driver, she's fifteen years old. tub, this so-called babysitter, this so-called fifteen-year-old has more in her little finger than most of us have in our entire bodies. i can tell you this little lady is something special."tub nodded. "i know the kids like her.""she's opened up whole worlds to me that i never knew were there.""what does nancy think about all of this?""she doesn't know.""you haven't told her?'"not yet. it's not so easy. she's been damned good to me all these years. then there's the kids to consider." the brightness in frank's eyes trembled and he wiped quickly at them with the back of his hand. "i guess you think i'm a complete bastard.""no, frank. i don't think that.""well, you _ought_ to.""frank, when you've got a friend it means you've always got someone on your side, no matter what. taht's the way i feel about it anyway.""you mean that, tub?""sure i do."frank smiled. "you don't know how good it feels to hear you say that."kenny had tried to get out of the truck but he hadn't made it. he was jackknifed over the tailgate, his head hanging above the bumper. they lifted him back into the bed, and covered him again. he was sweating and his teeth chattered. "it hurts, frank.""it wouldn't hurt so much if you just stayed put. now we're going to the hospital. go that? say it--i'm going to the hospital.""i'm going to the hospital.""again.""i'm going to the hospital.""now just keep saying that to yourself and befor eyou know it we'll be there."after they had gone a few miles tub turned to frank. "i just pulled a real boner," he said."what's that?""i left the directions on the table back there.""that's okay. i remember them pretty well."the snowfall lightened and the clouds began to roll back off the fields, but it was no warmer and after a time both frank and tub were bitten through and shaking. frank almost didn't make it around a curve, and they decided to stop at the next roadhouse.there was an automatic hand-dryer in the bathroom and they took turns standing in fron to it, opening their jackets and shirts and letting the jet of hot air breath across their faces and chests."you know," tub said, "what you told me back there, i appreciate it. trusting me."frank opened and closed his fingers in front of the nozzle. "the way i look at it, tub, no man is an island. you've got to trust someone.""frank--"frank waited."when i said that about my glands, that wasn't true. the truth is i just shovel it in.""well, tub--""day and night, frank. in the shower. on the freeway." he turned and let the air play over his back. "i've even got stuff in the paper towel machine at work.""there's nothing wrong with your glands at all?" frank had taken his boots and socks off. he held first his right, then his left foot up to the nozzle."no. there never was.""does alice know?" the machine went off and frank started lacking up his boots."nobody knows. that's the worst of it, frank. not the being fat, i never got any big kick out of being thin, but the lying. having to lead a double life like a spy or a hit man. this sounds strange but i feel sorry for those guys, i really do. i know what they go through. always having to think about what you say and do. always feeling like people are watching you, trying to catch you at something. never able to just be yourself. like when i make a big deal about only having an orange for breakfast and then scarf all the way to work. oreos, mars bars, twinkies. sugar babies. snickers." tub glanced at frank and looked quickly away. "pretty disgusting, isn't it?""tub. tub." frank shook his head. "come on." he took tub's arm and led him into the restaurant half o the bar. "my friend is hungry," he told the waitress. "bring four orders of pancakes, plenty of butter and syrup.""frank--""sit down."when the dishes came frank carved out slabs of butter and just laid them on the pancakes. then he emptied the bottle of syrup, moving it back and forth over the plates. he leaned forward on his elbows and rested his chin in one hand. "go on, tub."tub ate several mouthfuls, then started to wipe his lips. frank took the napkin away from him. "no wiping," he said. tub kept at it. the syrup covered his chin; it dripped to a point like a goatee. "weigh in, tub," frank said, pushing another fork across the table. "get down to business." tub took the fork in his left hand and lowered his head and started really chowing down. "clean you plate," frank said when the pancakes were gone, and tub lifted each of the four plates and licked it clean. he sat back, trying to catch his breath."beautiful," frank said. "are you full?""i'm full," tub said. "i've never been so full."kenny's blankets were bunched up against the tailgate again."they must have blown off," tub said."they're not doing him any good," frank said. we might as well get some use out of them."kenny mumbled. tub bent over him. "what? speak up.""i'm going to the hospital," kenny said."attaboy," frank said.the blankets helped. the wind still got their faces and frank's hands but it was much better. the fresh snow on the road and the trees sparkled under the beam of the headlight. squares of light from farmhouse windows fell onto the blue snow in the fields."frank," tub said after a time, "you know that farmer? he told kenny to kill the dog.""you're kidding!" frank leaded forward considering. "that kenny. what a card." he laughed and so did tub. tub smiled out the back window. kenny lay with his arms folded over his stomach, moving his lips at the stars. right overhead was the big dipper, and behind, hanging between kenny's toes in the direction of the hospital, was the north star, pole star, help to sailors. as the truck twisted through the gentle hills the star went back and forth between kenny's boots, staying always in his sight. "i'm going to the hospital," kenny said. but he was wrong. they had taken a different turn a long way back.whatever hour you woke there was a  door shutting. from room to room  they went, hand in hand, lifting here,  opening there, making sure--a ghostly  couple."here we left it," she said. and he  added, "oh, but here tool" "it's  upstairs," she murmured. "and in the  garden," he whispered. "quietly,"  they said, "or we shall wake them."but it wasn't that you woke us. oh,  no. "they're looking for it; they're  drawing the curtain," one might say,  and so read on a page or two. "now  they've found it,' one would be  certain, stopping the pencil on the  margin. and then, tired of reading,  one might rise and see for oneself,  the house all empty, the doors  standing open, only the wood  pigeons bubbling with content and  the hum of the threshing machine  sounding from the farm. "what did i  come in here for? what did i want to  find?" my hands were empty.  "perhaps its upstairs then?" the  apples were in the loft. and so down  again, the garden still as ever, only  the book had slipped into the grass.but they had found it in the  drawing room. not that one could  ever see them. the windowpanes  reflected apples, reflected roses; all  the leaves were green in the glass. if  they moved in the drawing room, the  apple only turned its yellow side. yet,  the moment after, if the door was  opened, spread about the floor, hung  upon the walls, pendant from the  ceiling--what? my hands were empty.  the shadow of a thrush crossed the  carpet; from the deepest wells of  silence the wood pigeon drew its  bubble of sound. "safe, safe, safe"  the pulse of the house beat softly.  "the treasure buried; the room . . ."  the pulse stopped short. oh, was that  the buried treasure?a moment later the light had faded.  out in the garden then? but the trees  spun darkness for a wandering beam  of sun. so fine, so rare, coolly sunk  beneath the surface the beam i  sought always burned behind the  glass. death was the glass; death  was between us, coming to the  woman first, hundreds of years ago,  leaving the house, sealing all the  windows; the rooms were darkened.  he left it, left her, went north, went  east, saw the stars turned in the  southern sky; sought the house,  found it dropped beneath the downs.  "safe, safe, safe," the pulse of the  house beat gladly. 'the treasure  yours."the wind roars up the avenue. trees stoop and bend this way and  that. moonbeams splash and spill  wildly in the rain. but the beam of the  lamp falls straight from the window.  the candle burns stiff and still.  wandering through the house,  opening the windows, whispering  not to wake us, the ghostly couple  seek their joy."here we slept," she says. and he  adds, "kisses without number."  "waking in the morning--" "silver  between the trees--"  "upstairs--" 'in the garden--"  "when summer came--" 'in winter  snowtime--" "the doors go shutting  far in the distance, gently knocking  like the pulse of a heart.nearer they come, cease at the  doorway. the wind falls, the rain  slides silver down the glass. our  eyes darken, we hear no steps beside  us; we see no lady spread her  ghostly cloak. his hands shield the  lantern. "look," he breathes. "sound asleep.  love upon their lips."stooping, holding their silver lamp  above us, long they look and deeply.  long they pause. the wind drives  straightly; the flame stoops slightly.  wild beams of moonlight cross both  floor and wall, and, meeting, stain the  faces bent; the faces pondering; the  faces that search the sleepers and  seek their hidden joy."safe, safe, safe," the heart of the  house beats proudly. "long  years--" he sighs. "again you  found me." "here," she murmurs,  "sleeping; in the garden reading;  laughing, rolling apples in the loft.  here we left our treasure--"  stooping, their light lifts the lids  upon my eyes. "safe! safe! safe!" the  pulse of the house beats wildly.  waking, i cry "oh, is this your buried  treasure? the light in the heart."